---
layout: page
title: Epistemic Progressivism
permalink: /epistemic-progressivism/
---

## Overview

Name ideas: Epistemic Progressivism, Post-Right Progressivism, Post-Rightism, Post-Progressivism

Epistemic progressivism draws significant influence from Karl Popper, Friedrich Nietzsche, and contemporary neoreactionary thought to formulate a syncretic alternative to modern day "progressivism"<ref>I use "progressivism" in quotations whenever referring to modern day socially left individuals, social justice warriors, critical theorists, etc. who have disproportionate influence on the construction of societal norms.</ref>. It takes particularly heavy influence from political blogger UBERSOY's "Right-Wing Progressivism"<ref>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uRpQ6NEAwUs</ref>, and can be seen as a less expressly conservative formulation of the ideology. Epistemic progressivism redefines progress to be the expansion of knowledge, and advocates for an organization of culture, economics, and political structure to assist in progress. Means by which this is achieved include a changing of epistemology to focus on the study of man as an animal itself, as well as the promotion of free markets, meritocracy, social mobility, freedom of expression, academic freedom, intellectual diversity, and ensuring that power is concentrated in the hands of the most competent. Epistemic progressivism comes with it a framework through which forms of meaning or narratives can be created which are compatible with the progress of humanity. This helps inhibit the salience and ability for irrational narratives to further spring up within society as they are developed.

## Five Pillars

The real meat of epistemic progressivism can be divided into five broad pillars. Each of these pillars are essential to understanding of the ideology, and epistemic progressivism cannot function without any of the five pillars. The pillars simultaneously come with them implicit attacks on "progressivism", while also positively proposing an alternative to it. The pillars are:

#**Evolutionary Epistemology -** The backbone of epistemic progressivism. It is the view that progress is characterized by the expansion of knowledge, and the well-being that is associated with it.
#**Moral Biorealism -** Moral Biorealism views ethics as a biological phenomenon, and holds that acknowledging man as an animal is the first step towards establishing a theory of ethics and advancing knowledge in the social realm.
#**Academic Freedom -** The promotion of freedom of speech and the freedom to pursue knowledge, both institutionally and culturally.
#**Intellectual Diversity -** Differences in cultures and political viewpoints ought to exist within knowledge-producing institutions, and reforms should be made to ensure its existence.
#**Free Market Epistocracy -** A deregulated free market which prioritizes meritocracy and ensures its existence through economic policy, such as a robust safety net and antidiscrimination laws. Moreover, a Free Market Epistocracy advocates for a political system whereby those with greater political knowledge are given greater decision-making powers in society.

### Evolutionary Epistemology

Evolutionary epistemology is a theory of progress, according to which progress is defined as the advancement of knowledge in society. Because progress is inherently wrapped up in goodness, the framework generally views the advancement of knowledge in itself as good. The notion of an evolutionary epistemology is used to examine various societies to see how progressive they are. Societies which structure themselves to promote the advancement of knowledge are viewed as progressive, and societies which actively stifle or aim to limit knowledge through censorship or other means are viewed as conservative or reactionary. Societies that were progressive have historically developed faster and tended to outcompete those that were conservative or reactionary. Evolutionary epistemology recognizes this competition as a descriptive reality, and as generally a historic good as it meant that living standards have been able to accelerate as fast as they did. This ultimately benefits humanity more broadly. As a descriptive term, evolutionary epistemology recognizes the means by which our knowledge-accumulating mental processes developed. The intelligence that mankind is characteristic for is an evolved process, where those who had faster processing speed, better memory, etc. were able to reproduce and pass on their children. Hence, it views progress as an inevitable property of societal development, and thus that epistemic progressivism will inevitably win out.

The notion of an evolutionary epistemology also provides a rhetorical framework through which to engage in political discourse. Through arguing that modern day "progressives" ultimately stifle knowledge through relying on poor epistemologies and the stifling of oppositional speech, evolutionary epistemologists can argue that they are in reality conservatives or reactionaries according to any moral framework. The discourse is shifted away from the notion that any opposition to modern day "progressivism" is in itself a rejection of progress, and as the epistemic progressivism meme spreads it'll instead be seen as the embracement of it.

Evolutionary epistemology also acknowledges the role that knowledge plays more broadly in societal development. All technological development occurs almost by definition due to advances in knowledge, as does social policy and advances in health. Factors which increase the amount of knowledge in an economy have for decades been considered the driving causes of long-run economic growth within a society. From this perspective, the notion of an evolutionary epistemology creates the foundation for an objective and material notion by which progress can be defined, given how knowledge is so fundamental to so many aspects of society and its flourishing.

### Moral Biorealism

Moral biorealism is both a theory of how morality emerges and how we ought to examine morality itself. Morality is viewed under the theory from a biological perspective, which sees people as individuals who must necessary engage in a degree of cooperation for our own survival. The fundamental contradiction and difficulty within ethics concerns the issue of the degree to which the welfare of the individual matter more than the welfare of the collective, or broader society. Moral biorealism views this contradiction as being resolved by a form of egoism in which humanity is given moral consideration according to its genetic similarity to the self. Cooperative or altruistic behavior is thus regarded as egoistic by the mere fact that via helping others you are helping crude extensions of oneself.

Moral biorealism suggests that because this is how morality evolves within humanity, the concerns of morality cannot be viewed outside of this fact, and hence all ethical theorizing must begin with an acknowledgment of the fact that man is a selfish animal that has obligations to others only insofar as it helps the self, including ones extended kinship. Philosophy hence must be seen as an attempt to articulate one's underlying desires as opposed to functioning as a replacement. Said theory also allows us to explain our existing moral intuitions towards others, including the varying degrees to which we engage in what could be viewed as biases. Specifically, it helps to explain the bias people have towards their family (extended kin) and friends (who are also generally genetically similar to the individual), ethnocentric biases (further extended kin), and then the bias that man has towards humanity, followed by bias that people have towards animals that are more similar to humans than others.

With evolutionary epistemology holding knowledge as playing an essential role in societal development, biorealism suggests that the study of man's biology is indispensable to progress. In the framework of Karl Popper's Three Worlds Ontology, biorealism sees the second world of mental processes as being the primary focal point according to which the study of society should be firstly focused. The second world of mental processes produces cultural artifacts, which are considered to be in the third world, and is instantiated in the physical world one environment. Biorealism stands in contrast to idealism, which prioritizes the study of world three cultural artifacts; and materialism, which prioritizes the study of the physical world one environment. It studies the mediator between the ideas that mankind produces and the external world: man. Examining the biology of people allows us to understand the potential and limitations of our species, which can have important implications for examining how society should be structured. From this perspective, it can be argued that the deliberate ignorance of and outright refusal to study innate individual differences as well as group differences relating to sex and race are inhibiting progress. Biorealism acknowledges the unequal endowments that different people are naturally born with.

Biorealism is also sympathetic to methods by which genetic enhancement can contribute to the well-being of society. The advancement of technologies such as gene editing can allow for individuals to be born with higher innate capabilities, who then will be able to make more contributions to the well-being of humanity.

### Academic Freedom

Academic freedom refers to a policy and philosophical framework by which academics are free to study whatever they wish to, and more broadly that individuals are free to pursue knowledge. The promotion of academic freedom extends to the support of freedom of speech within the wider society beyond academia. While epistemic progressivism acknowledge the indispensable role that academics in all fields can play in advancing knowledge, epistemic progressivism still acknowledges the role that the broader society plays, in terms of accumulating knowledge itself as well as disseminating knowledge. Moreover, the broader society can act as a dialectic according to which those within academia can reform their ideas when demonstrated to be ineffective or exposed by the public as needing modification.

Academic freedom and freedom of speech are not simply limited to advocacy for legal and institutional protections for the pursuit of knowledge, but also extend to an advocacy for a set of cultural values. Cultural values include the promotion of rationality, open mindedness, tolerance, and intellectual humility. The promotion of such values amongst the academy as well as general population ensures that not only are individuals institutionally free to pursue knowledge, but also do not feel social pressure which may inhibit their practical ability to pursue it.

The promotion of academic freedom also entails within it a skepticism of the notion of research ethics. While it does not suggest that it is impossible to engage in unethical research, it is weary of pushes by institutions to stifle research on the grounds that the research in and of itself may be "ethically questionable". Such institutional pushes generally stifle the production of knowledge and hence stifle progress.

### Intellectual Diversity

Intellectual diversity is heavily related to the advocacy of academic freedom and freedom of speech on an institutional and cultural level. It views differences in cultures and political values within the social sciences as being intrinsically valuable for pursuing knowledge. While there exist strong and generally agreed upon frameworks for studying a number of scientific fields, such as mathematics, physics, and chemistry, the same cannot be said for the social sciences. Without the presence of a broad theoretical framework to examine social phenomena, much of even the most basic theorizing on social issues is ambiguous and leaves open room for bias to enter. To help increase the information we have about the world and to help correct these biases, it is important to have a balance of researchers from various backgrounds. These various backgrounds will inform how different researchers approach various research questions as well as what research inquiries they will examine in the first place.

Intellectual diversity is also valuable in that it promotes debate and creates a sense of competition between researchers. With multiple perspectives being present within an institution, a climate is created where one must constantly work to strengthen their knowledge and arguments surrounding issues, lest they be outpaced by someone with a rivalling intellectual framework.

From a policy perspective, the promotion of intellectual diversity is advocated for as a replacement for many existing diversity hiring initiatives, which hire people on the basis of race or sex. These policies, while expanding cultural diversity to a degree, ultimately undermine intellectual diversity as they almost exclusively draw from pools of people with a more left-leaning political orientation. This expands the already existent left-wing ideological homogeneity characteristic of many knowledge-producing institutions today. The presence of intellectual diversity does not imply the absence of demographic diversity. In many cases it is the opposite. A policy of intellectual diversity will likely increase the representation of many demographic groups relative to no diversity policy due to it valuing differences in cultural, philosophical, and political outlook which often differ between people of various ethnic and gender backgrounds.

### Free Market Epistocracy

The term "Free Market Epistocracy" refers to the broader practical political structure that epistemic progressivism advocates for. A free market epistocracy is a society where the economic and political structures are oriented towards a hierarchical meritocracy. A biorealist analysis of society acknowledges that different levels of wealth between people are oftentimes a product of differences in genetic traits between individuals, such as cognitive ability. However, differences in socioeconomic status between people can nonetheless oftentimes inhibit the ability for individuals to achieve their full potential. Moreover, higher inequality within a society is a predictor of broader societal turmoil, such as a decline in social trust. A robust level of social mobility must therefore be politically instantiated through social welfare programs to increase general trust and knowledge production.

A free market must be impersonal as to ensure that true meritocracy can exist. Taste-based discrimination against individuals, whether it be nepotistic in nature, ethnocentric, or something else, should be frowned upon. In any context beyond a small scale it should be legally outlawed to ensure a meritocracy should be formed. Epistemic progressivism advocates for a separation between private and public realms. Any preferences are perfectly fine on a private level but should be heavily stigmatized in public. In the presence of a meritocracy, there will naturally be inequalities on individual and group levels. These are perfectly acceptable. Epistemic progressivism is an inherently elitist philosophy that accepts the existence of such inequalities and views them as being inextricable from meritocracy. Meritocracy requires inequality.

A free market must also be deregulated as much as possible to ensure that competition can thrive. The more that you allow for new firms to enter markets, the more incentive there is for companies to continuously innovate. This inhibits ideological capture of private institutions which will be unable to compete in the presence of other rival institutions.

Similarly, political structures should be oriented hierarchically. An epistocracy is a society whereby additional voting privileges or even the right to vote is granted on the basis of a person's political competence. Those with a higher level of political knowledge should be granted a higher degree of authority over how the society should function. People must prove their knowledge about society before they can be granted the ability to change it. Ideally, there still needs to be a decentralization of power within the society. Giving too few individuals the right to vote may result in corruption and instability. Voting rights should hence be granted to at least 10-20% of the population.

## Epistemic Progressivism and the Crisis of Meaning

Epistemic progressivism comes with it a framework for understanding the world that effectively describes reality and how we ought to describe our society. But the utility or intuitive salience of the framework does not necessarily come with it the provision of a sense of meaning. "Progressivism" has a firm grip on the contemporary societal consciousness and comes with it a fairly salient conceptualization of our history and present, and a vision for the future. But the rise of "progressivism" has not substantially addressed the lack of meaning present in our society. The presence of a framework, even one that is accurate and salient, cannot by itself solve the issue of meaning. It can, however, help define where meaning may be derived.

There are two types of meaning which can be derived from epistemic progressivism. The first could be categorized as types of meaning which can coexist with the framework but also have the ability to exist without it, and the second could be categorized as types of meaning which help to fill in the framework, a supplementary meaning. Particularly significant examples of both which could be employed are discussed below, with a coexisting type of meaning being identitarianism, and a supplementary type of meaning being technofuturism.

### Identitarianism

Identitarianism here is defined very broadly as simply the preference for and identification with those who are of a similar nature to oneself. This can encompass a wide range of attributes, including as narrow as family in the case of many "conservative" ideologies<ref>I am using "conservatism" in quotes to refer to how it is used in contemporary discussion and to distinguish it from how epistemic progressivism defines conservatism.</ref>, and as broad as humanity in the case of humanism. It also contains within it a range of identities in between, the most common being race, ethnicity, and nationality. A particularly striking fact in western societies is that white people, in spite of being of a higher economic status and having "white privilege", nonetheless have lower mental health than many minority ethnic groups and also have higher suicide rates. Part of this is likely due to the lack of a sense of identity that white people have. Compared to minority ethnic groups, whites tend to identify less with their ethnic or racial background.
"Progressives" encourage other minority groups to have a sense of ethnic identity but demonize it for white people. They engage in a selective form of identitarianism. But within this identitarianism there is an implicit recognition that having an ingroup preference or sense of identity does not entail outgroup prejudice. The average person who has a "black identity" does not have an especially strong hatred for white people, even if they have an ingroup bias. Similar to how familial bias exists and is generally accepted in society, and does not entail an outgroup hatred of those who do not belong to one's family. An identitarian society is simply one in which freedom of association on the basis of biological similarities is accepted. Identitarianism also tolerates or encourages national pride.

While identitarianism has significant value in terms of offering people meaning, it must be kept as a private endeavor. This means that in public and legal contexts, preference for those who are within a family, ethnic, or other group should not receive preference over others, with very few exceptions. Immigration policy should exist on the basis of merit. Employee nondiscrimination law should reflect the fact that economic standing should be on the basis of merit. The distinction between the private and the public must be maintained.

Another caveat to identitarianism is that it cannot by itself solve the issue of meaning. Even though it does provide a greater sense of community for many, it does not dictate to people how they ought to live, and so it does not completely solve the meaning issue. It is helpful, but insufficient.

### Technofuturism

Part of the challenge with creating an alternative narrative which tells people how to live as discussed in [[Understanding the Issue]] is that telling people how to live risks undermining evolutionary epistemology. Epistemic progressivism views society as an animal which must constantly be changing and evolving lest it be outcompeted by other societies. Narratives are stories, they are meant to be unchanging and to provide structure to society, but epistemic progressivism in a sense necessitates fluidity, a lack of structure.

It seems that the only way to solve the issue is to value the evolution in itself. Technofuturism can be described as the fetishization of technological advancement as an end in itself. It is difficult to say how exactly such a narrative would manifest itself, and what its particular narrative particularities would be. The "progressive" narrative that society is a never-ending struggle to infinitely expand the moral circle, to reduce everyone to copies with undifferentiated outcomes, would have been difficult to have predicted. Nonetheless, in hindsight one can see its origins in the slave morality tendency Nietzsche had observed in Christianity, the religion which had its grasp in the west and only began to decline recently in historical terms. A reverse situation to this will likely occur, whereby the factors and focus of this technofuturist narrative can be envisioned beforehand, but the particulars cannot. This will likely occur without any consciousness on the part of epistemic progressives or related political theorists, but nonetheless epistemic progressivism provides a useful framework to understand its development and a good framework to ensure that its manifestation does not undermine progress.

## Limitations and Criticisms

### Is the Advancement of Knowledge Always a Good?

An important question to be asked is whether the advancement of knowledge itself should be regarded as a good. Within the rationale for viewing history through the lens of progress it was implied that the advancement of knowledge was good because it advanced society. It was simultaneously framed as an end in itself and also as a means to an end. Is it both, or just one of them? The whole notion of evolutionary epistemology as a theory says that our epistemology and knowledge-seeking mental devices were evolved for the survival of humans. This implies that knowledge production wasn't an ends to itself but rather a means by which we could maximize our own survival as a species. But evolution is rife with examples of species which did not need a high level of intelligence to thrive. In fact, sometimes a high level of intelligence can actually inhibit a species survival. Evolution does not always select for high intelligence.

An intuitive reason for this, but certainly not the only reason, is that there is a high energy cost associated with high intelligence. For our body weight, humans need to consume significantly more calories to sustain the proportionately larger brains characteristic of our species. It may be the case that the payoff associated with having higher intelligence is insufficient to compensate for the required boost in caloric intake. Intelligence may not feed you more, and in cases where there is little food, that means a higher probability of death.

There are also intuitive examples in which the advancement of knowledge, at least for particular parties, may be bad for those parties or to societal well-being more broadly. It makes sense why details of personal affairs are often kept hidden from others, the telling of which is framed as "too much information". Some information is useless or is not of other people's business. It can be used to unfairly control or influence others in interpersonal situations. People have a right to privacy. Additionally, secrets on a governmental level may also be necessary in some cases for the purpose of national security. For these reasons, lying and the deliberate hiding of information, or the deliberate banning of investigation of information, may sometimes be justifiable. But on a political level, this should always be done with care and with a strong understanding of the risks associated with incorrectly assessing whether a piece of information should be kept hidden. Restrictions on knowledge or its pursuit at a national level should have to be justified, and the default should be an absence of restriction.

## References

<ol id="source-list"></ol>
