---
layout: page
title: Philosophy
permalink: /philosophy/
---

## Political Philosophies/Analytical Tools

### Cultural Relativism

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Cultural Relativism](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/0/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Cultural relativism is the view that culture is the key variable to explain human diversity and that individuals’ characteristics are bound by the culture they belong to. Intragroup differences are usually minimized and intergroup differences maximized. This has been linked and at times conflated with normative relativism, holding that all cultures are of the same worth and that people’s behavior ought to be judged in terms of the values of their culture. Cultural relativist arguments have also been used to support moral skepticism and to criticize the values of one’s own culture. Nonetheless, to the first generation of professional anthropologists cultural relativism was more an epistemological position or attitude when working in the field, approaching cultural values with a sense of objectivity.

### Falsificationism

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Falsification](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/0/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Falsification is typically associated with the work of Karl Popper, but revisions were made to his position in the 1960s and 1970s due to dissatisfaction with his analysis. Falsificationism was bound up with the problem of distinguishing science from pseudo-science, a category within which he included the theories of Freud and Marx, holding that it must be possible for an empirical scientific system to be refuted by empiricism.

Imre Lakatos held that falsifiability as a principle was a general criterion of scientificity and not a specific methodological instruction. As Duhem and later Quine suggested, there is no thread of falsification relating the world of observables to that of theory, and sociology of science studies of scientific controversies reveal the reasons for actually rejecting a hypothesis or theory are many and varied. Lakatos attempted to revise falsification, holding that Popper's position was misrepresented. He replaces the core supposition that theories must be falsifiable with a more pluralist account which emphasizes inconsistency among theories.

### Queer Theory

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Queer Theory](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/0/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Queer theory takes account of the cultural products, social practices, and institutions which together bestow on heterosexuality a sacred status. It shares the basic impulse of social constructionism to illustrate social underpinnings of sexual difference, and to critique the idea that sexual orientations correspond to different natures.

However, queer theory criticizes the social constructionist assumption that once sexual identities are established they exist as relatively stable empirical facts, and through this disagree with the idea that heterosexual and homosexual worlds are separate and distinct. Queer theorists argue that although it is sometimes necessary to use such a lens, it ignores the diverse experiences amongst gays and lesbians. Moreover, they argue that homosexuality and heterosexuality do not refer to anything empirical but are rather signs in a language system which refer to and derive their meaning from one another.

Queer politics argues not only against the social dominance of heterosexuality but also the mainstream of the gay and lesbian community which ignores intersectionally marginalized homosexuals, thus reinforcing the regime of normality. Some have critiqued queer theory as being overreaching in its critique of identity, holding that homosexualityh is more than the effect of a linguistic or textual system but is an identity that informs the practices of individuals in their daily lives, practices that vary depending on institutional settings and other social roles.

## Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology Notes

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Authoritarian Personality](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

The authoritarian personality is a psychological syndrome of traits which correlates highly with outgroup prejudice, the traits being deference to authorities, aggression toward outgroups, and rigid adherence to cultural conventions. This was introduced by the Frankfurt school to explain Hitler’s popularity among Germans and in 1950 the book “The Authoritarian Personality” appeared, which offered clinical and questionnaire evidence.

Critics immediately disparaged the work on a variety of grounds. Right-wingers disputed the finding that conservatives scored higher on the F (for fascism) scale and argued there was widespread authoritarianism on the left as well, although research repeatedly shows that the former finding is correct on average. Methodological critics unearthed problems such as that the clinical evaluators were not blind to the F Scale scores of their interviewees, and thus their assessments were not independent. Moreover, the study was criticized for its neglect of social context under which authoritarianism rises. While many of these criticisms have merit, research still consistently suggests high scorers are more likely to favor extreme right-wing politics and exhibit prejudice against outgroups.

The consistency of results globally suggests the authoritarian personality is a general personality syndrome with early origins in childhood that center on issues of authority. The original study drew from psychoanalysis, stressing the effects of a stern father in early life. Later formulations emphasize the syndrome’s focus on strength and weakness, its intense orientation to the ingroup, and the importance of modeling authoritarian behavior by parents. Recent work suggests that rejection by an early caregiver leads to an avoidant attachment style that closely resembles authoritarian personality. Surveys also explain why authoritarianism is universally related to outgroup prejudice, as authoritarians tend to feel politically powerless and that modern life is too complex, both predictors of prejudice. Authoritarians tend to associate with others who are prejudices and tend to avoid contact with outgroup members.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Bourdieu, Pierre (1930-2002)](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Bourdieu examined power in his work, holding that culture is a symbolic order which provides the components of control and unconscious mechanisms of reproduction of such control. This was made to resolve the dilemmas of objectivism vs subjectivism, structure vs agency, and determination vs freedom. Bourdieu held these could only be transcended by taking into account the existence of invisible objective structures and agents’ subjective interpretations of their circumstances, drawing from structuralism. A field is a structured space of positions, a hierarchy based on unequal distributions in a variety of areas. Fields are characterized by struggles to improve one’s position, and also compete with each other for dominance. For example, religious and political actors may both want to influence art.

For Bourdieu, the major determinant of practices is habitus, or dispositions socially acquired. An agent’s subjectivity is itself structured through habitus and its social conditions. By combining both field and habitus, Bourdieu is able to transcend the structure/agency dilemma by integrating them. If these determine practice, the field of sociology itself should not be exempt from sociological analysis. Later in life, he entered the public sphere to engage in major political issues, but wary of being co-opted by social movements, he entered carefully.

In his work on television, Bourdieu examined how the journalistic field operates. He distinguished between pure and commercial poles of journalism, where the pure pole is organized autonomously according to its own internal ethical codes and principles, and the commercial pole is economic demand imposed by external agents which constrains good journalistic practices. His concern was that the commercial pole is becoming dominant, which has effects on journalism but also on culture, science, academia, etc which are influenced by journalism. One important consequence of this is the depoliticization of news through focusing on anecdotes at the expense of socially and politically significant news.

Boureieu examined the use of the concept of globalization, believing it is both a descriptive and normative concept. It conveys the worldwide expansion of capital while also suggesting it is normatively inescapable and that countries must adapt to it. In the social reality masked by the myth of globalization, progressive welfare state systems are being liquidated under neoliberal ideology. This decline in the power of the nation state correlates with the rise in power of the World Bank, IMF, and WTO. This is presented as necessary, but it is the product of ideological strategies by actors in the economic field to increase their symbolic capital, presented as objective, scientific, and rational, but in reality not being so. This enables attacks to be done against anyone who opposes globalization. This was also achieved by turning economics into an entirely abstract and mathematical discipline, creating models which do not necessarily represent reality but are presented as such. What may be the fault of the model is then blamed on politicians or citizens who are too ignorant or undisciplined to make the right economic choices. These mathematical models confuse the things of logic for the logic of things, in which reality becomes irrelevant. The consequences of this are disastrous as they increase political apathy, depoliticize, and create a crisis of legitimacy of the political class. This is directly the result of the takeover of economic matters by global institutions without accountability. Moreover, everything collectiver is destroyed, leaving people to fend for themselves in an individualized labor market.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Derrida, Jacques (1930-2004)](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Derrida is a philosopher known for developing deconstruction, which seeks to analyze signifying objects in terms of the differences that are constitutive of those objects. Typically this proceeds through an analysis of the ambivalent and marginal terms that help secure the bounded understanding of a text, concept, or phenomenon, but which cannot be reduced to a final, stable meaning intended by the author or orthodox interpretation.

Despite criticisms to the contrary, Derrida did not suggest it was impossible to have coherent interpretations of things. Rather, he suggested that the coherence of any interpretation is derived within a specific semantic code and thus is premised on the iterability of such a code. In repetition, there is always the possibility of slippage, which can reshape the meaning of an interpretation. This suggests continuity and stability, but also points to the open-ended nature of texts. Derrida’s famous quote “There is nothing outside of the text” points to the ways in which texts are unendingly opened by the very terms that mark the bounded field of meaning that makes any understanding possible. On the other hand, Derrida does not seek to destroy conceptual traditions from which texts emerge, but seeks to denaturalize that which might seem natural and decided.

His approach to reading thus has ethical and epistemic implications. Normatively, Derrida’s approach emphasizes a respect for the other that comes outside our current understandings, resisting the tendency to reduce what is different to the interpreted grids we have inherited.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Dewey, John (1859-1952)](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Dewey above all helped infuse much of sociology with pragmatism, rejecting metaphysical hierarchies and assumptions and favoring a process of practical experimentation and seeing what works. Reality is seen as uncertain so our understanding must constantly be revised with new evidence and experimentation. This kind of reflexivity extends to the process of inquiry itself.

His overarching sociological research problem was perhaps the simultaneous strengthening of the individual and community. Habits are seen not as personal properties but interpersonal adaptations to institutional arrangements, thus amenable to improvement through the exercise of deliberative intelligence exercised by communities. The most important of these is the school, which is thus organized as a community of active doers, teachers and students alike, integrated as much as possible into the larger community.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Du Bois: "Talented Tenth"](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

In an article called “The Talented Tenth”, Du Bois proposed a highly visible role for the educated segment of the black population, who would actively attempt to give a voice to the needs of black America. Booker T. Washington criticized the idea that those who devoted much of their life to book learning would have much use in dealing with real people and their problems, and many did not like the elitist nature of Du Bois’s concept. Still, his concept did not suggest that he wanted these people to lord over blacks, but it was a recognition that some people had unique assets which they should use for the collective benefit of the entire population, and who could serve as a bridge between black and white worlds.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Du Bois, W. E. B. (1868-1963)](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Du Bois was a sociologist and historian, viewing the connection between theory and research as inextricably linked to the alleviation of social problems and as contributors to overall societal reform. Du Bois was the first American scholar to use sociological data methods to study the social structure and behavioral characteristics of a minority group within a larger majority and dominant class. His assertion in the book “Souls” predicted the problem of the 20th century would be that of racism, vowing to lend a hand in the destruction of the color line. This was particularly clear in his debate with and attack on the major black leader of the early 20th century, Booker T. Washington, although neither succeeded. Still, major debates on the importance of industrial vs higher education, the priority of economics vs politics and civil rights, and the style and type of leadership needed for black America, continue to resonate.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Gramsci, Antonio (1891-1937)](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Gramsci held that sociology was an attempt to create a scientific method based on evolutionary positivism for explaining history and politics, but that because it attempted to establish laws of evolution of society it could not grasp any qualitative social transformation. He didn’t dismiss statistical techniques outright, admitting when social groups and structures are relatively unchanging they might have some limited validity, but that they can’t be used generally. However, its application could be disastrous for guiding political action, encouraging laziness and superficiality in a domain where the object was action.

Objective social reality was merely historically subjective, requiring scientific and non-scientific study. Propositions made from it have no force until taken up by great masses and made practical. Thus, any foresight was made true only because masses acted as if it were. This made technological determinism nonsense, as it required an assumption that humans had in fact been driven to engage in such action.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: King, Martin Luther (1929-68)](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

King in his early work discussed non-violence as a means to achieve restorative justice, and his later leadership demonstrated his skills as a public sociologist. His ability to take academically challenging ideas and translate them for mass appeal made him an unusual example of what a public sociologist does.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Lacan, Jacques (1901-81)](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Lacan defined his psychiatric approach as a return to Freud. By introducing the concept of the unconscious, he and Freud showed that human life is not governed by biological processes and instincts but by linguistic processes that create meaning, and that complete knowledge and unity of the subject is impossible. Lacan came up with many conceptual developments in human consciousness, the first of which is known as the mirror stage between the ages of 6-18 months. This is when they are able to identify themselves in a mirror as complete individuals, although see the mirror self as a separate other, who is a perfect ideal compared to the disorganized and fragmented self. This is what Lacan calls the ego ideal.

Coinciding with this is the development of language, in which the child enters into the symbolic order according to the Oedipus complex. This acquisition corresponds to the child’s separation from the world of the mother and movement into the social world, the world of the father. This loss gives rise to sexual desire in the subject. The movement is away from the “real” and towards the “symbolic”, two components in the tripartite order that defines the human subject, the third being the “imaginary”. While some suggest that Lacan’s statement that “the woman does not exist” is misogynistic, others say it is a description of patriarchal reality, in that women are merely a product of men’s desires. The result of the split of the subject is the never ending search for complete identity through identifications in the sociopolitical reality, but since this split is the loss of the real, a full identity can never be achieved, even if identity politics may promise such fullness. 

Most political utopian projects, such as Nazism and Communism, are based on the idea of creating such fullness at the social level, but since social reality is riddled with conflicts and other problems, such utopian projects always need a scapegoat to blame for delays in achieving the imaginary society, and therefore to be exterminated. Democracy is the only viable Lacanian political project because it is based on the acceptance of the institutionalization of conflict, integrating the lack constitutive of human existence and turning it into institutions.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Liberal Feminism](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Liberal feminism is one of the earliest forms of feminism, holding that men and women must have equal rights grounded in liberal philosophy. There is a clear division between the role of the state and individual freedom, and solutions should be made within existing social structures and through changing attitudes. Sexism was viewed as improper behavior by people who were conditioned by society’s bad ideas about gender roles. Social change would come from eliminating structural barriers and changing cultural expectations of women’s roles as wives and mothers, as well as to establish equality between genders.

Sociologists looked at marriage and family, suggesting that the traditional nuclear family structure has been used to support the division of labor in society, which limits women’s opportunities. Additionally, for women who work for pay outside the home, researchers have found their responsibilities at home rarely change, and husbands rarely increase their role in the home to assist women working outside of it. Therefore women have a “second shift”. A liberal feminist solution to this is to call for changes in family law, such as providing more support through parental leave policies and well as to educate men and women to make their relationship more equal. Liberal feminists have also falled for increased support for childcare, welfare reform, laws to challenge traditional concepts of family, and to extend support to single parents and lower-income families.

Research was also done on the workplace, where women were expected to go into pink collar occupations such as nursing, teaching, secretarial positions, or maids. These paid low wages and offered few to no opportunities for advancement. This continued after it became illegal to hire according to gender. Through socializing women to continue this, men have less competition in employment as well as entry into colleges and universities. Moreover, women continue to earn less than men and are underrepresented in politics. Another tenet of liberal feminism is that women have the right to privacy, which includes complete control over their bodies. However, a critique of liberal feminism is that it doesn’t look at the abortion rights of marginalized groups, and thus has great difficult uniting a range of women.

From the beginning of the women’s movement, there has been strong criticism as to the elitism of liberal feminism, with most positions of power and authority being given to privileged white women. Liberal feminism has also been criticized for its lack of systematic analysis of the social structures that maintain gender inequality.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Malthus, Thomas Robert (1766-1834)](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Malthus is the most influential writer in history on population. He wanted to be optimistic about life, but felt intellectually he couldn’t. He believed that human beings were impelled to reproduce, and that if there were no checks on population growth, humans would multiply to an incalculable number. The ultimate check to growth is lack of food. While starvation rarely directly kills people, there were checks that it provided morally or physically which weakened population growth. Additionally, forms of birth control can limit population growth. However, abstinence was the only acceptable means of preventing a birth to Malthus.

An important part of the Malthusian perspective which Karl Marx attacked was the belief that a natural consequence of population growth was poverty, which was a logical end result of his arguments. Malthus borrowed from Locke, arguing the endeavor to avoid pain is a greater stimulus to action than the pursuit of pleasure, and thus rational people would postpone marriage and sexual intercourse until he was sure he could avoid that pain. Sexual intercourse without the fear of pregnancy, according to him, would destroy a man’s work ethic.

Malthus was opposed to welfare, because he felt it would permit poor people to be dependent on others and thus would not feel the pain associated with having children, which would lead to less responsibility and rationality. His ideas led to reforms in welfare payments at the time. Marx opposed this, viewing that poverty resulted from social injustice, not overpopulation. Historical evidence does not support Malthus, showing those English counties with more generous welfare benefits did not have a higher birth rate than those with fewer generous benefits. Malthus inspired Darwin, who held that all species grew exponentially and not just humans, unlike what Malthus believed. This meant that all species acted naturally as checks on them.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Pareto, Vilfredo (1848-1923)](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Pareto grew disillusioned with democracy with age and became increasingly conservative. After the ride to power the fascists conferred honor on Pareto, although while Pareto was sympathetic to fascism, his fervent support of laissez-faire economics and his belief in individual liberty ran counter to totalitarian ideologies.

He attempted to build in Walrasian general equilibrium theory, going beyond utility maximization in perfect market conditions and basing the analysis of economic equilibrium on the opposition of tastes and obstacles to satisfying them. Pareto’s law, which uses a logarithmic formula to describe income distributions, and Pareto efficiency, an allocation of resources in which no change can be made without making someone else worse off.

Pareto held that economics had to be complemented by a more complex model than that offered by pure economics, basing it on the distinction between logical and non-logical actions. If an individual’s action has no logical correspondence between their means and ends, that action can be said to be illogical. Pareto argued that the vast majority of people’s actions are illogical, following Hume’s famous dictum that reason is “the slave of the passions”. In this context he introduced the notions of residues, which are impulses, and derivations, which are rationalizations people use to explain their behavior. The ability of the elite to maintain power, he held depended on a mixture of class I residues (instinct of combination, the idea to combine a lot of elements together, in this instance, to speculate that a person in power is going to improve the state of things, without reference to whether they can actually do it), and class II residues (persistence of aggregates, the idea that aggregates such as groups and cultures are upheld even when they are irrational). When a ruling class remained in power for some time, it tended to become dominated by the residues of class II, which left them poorly equipped to cope with social transformations. In such a new situation a new and innovative elite would emerge in which the residues of class I prevailed and displaced the old one.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Parsons, Talcott (1902-79)](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Talcott Parsons was the preeminent sociological theorist of his generation, developing an influential general theory of action, which was continuously revised throughout his academic career.

His later formulation was a “four action paradigm”, which analyzed the concept of the action system into 4 general aspects of dimensions:

*Pattern maintenance, the processes of developing enduring attachment to basic principles that distinguish a system from its environment, such as its basic values.

*Integration or the processes of reciprocal adjustment among a system’s units, promoting their interdependence.

*Goal attainment for changing a system’s relations with its environment to align them with shared ends

*Adaptation or developing generalized control over the environment.

There exists subsystems which represent these. The economy fulfills the adaptive function, the polity for goal attainment, societal community for integrative, and the fiduciary system for pattern maintenance. The idea of exchanges between subsystems was a generalization of economists’ treatment of the double exchanges, such as wages for labor and consumer spending for goods and services, all of which Parsons placed at the boundary between the fiduciary system and economy. Parsons then sought to generalize on money’s role by identifying similarly symbolic media for other subsystems. Power was that for political processes, influence for the societal community, and commitments for the fiduciary system.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Poststructuralism](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Poststructuralist approaches tend to cluster around two overlapping camps, that being a literary camp and a sociological and anthropological camp. Linguistic and cultural uses of poststructuralism draw from debates on whether the essential nature of language and human consciousness is rooted in constantly shifting systems of meaning. Ferdinand de Saussure founded linguistic structuralism arguing that language only has meaning in relation to a specific cultural framework.

Roland Barthes was interested in intertextuality, the idea that a work of art has a meaning that shifts according to the audience experiencing it and its relationship to other works of art. His ideas were further expanded by thinkers such as Derrida and Baudrillard who emphasize the constantly shifting nature of any system of signifiers. Thus, because these meanings aren’t linked to any specific real world referent, attempts to close systems of meaning under the guise of accuracy are power games masked as objectivity.

The sociological usage of the term poststructuralism refers to a shift from structuralist models of agency, society, and power to a more general understanding of the way that social structures influence behavior and identity. These poststructuralists drew from Parsons and Durkheim, among others, while reaching different conclusions. Durkheim argued that despite ther fact that the machinations of society are invisible, they can be studied objectively. Parsons argued that social institutions primarily exist to condition individuals to internalized social roles and to adapt psychological and biological needs to fit within a larger social order. Poststructuralists extended these ideas arguing human agency is shaped but not determined by a wide variety of social structures and cultural forces. This group is primarily interested in how ideology shapes people, and some attempt to describe the microstructures internal to every socialized person which mediate any decision we make.

Bourdieu argued that social control is implanted on individuals through mutually reinforcing interaction between individual psyche and social individuals, arguing that there are a variety of social fields which mediate people’s behavior in different ways, and arguing that habitus or tastes and habits act as forms of symbolic capital which are valued or denigrated within various social fields. This makes us feel like we are freely making certain decisions due to it feeling natural, but it leads us to act in scripted ways.

Foucault provided detailed expositions of how discourses become prominent within modern societies primarily because they provide more effective applications of social power while at the same time trying to solve newly identified social problems. He explained how a compulsion to discuss and classify sexuality is not a sign of liberation but a foundation for developing more pervasive systems of control over sexuality.

Critics of poststructuralism argue that the scientific study of culture or society is nearly impossible if these forces are viewed as situational and constantly shifting and that there is little or no opportunity for resistance against social forces if they are internalized and invisible to individuals. Poststructuralists argue that they have methods of analysis which provide them with an indirect approach to understanding society, such as genealogy by Foucault. People like Foucault however do acknowledge that their theories have little use in improving the lot of those living within oppressive systems. However, some believe that understanding the workings of social power can provide a limited degree of resistance and reform, such as changing one’s usage of language.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Radical Feminism](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Radical feminism was a revolutionary movement which looked at women’s equality at the structural level, calling for findamental institutional and cultural changes in society. There are 3 main beliefs. First, radical feminism argued gender was the primary oppression all women face. Second, it said women were fundamentally different from men essentially or due to socialization. Third, it held that social institutions rely on and maintain women’s oppression. Susan Griffin and Susan Brownmiller drawing on this third strand argued that rape was not about sex but about the enforcement of partiarchial control and misogyny.

The idea that the “personal is political” came out of radical feminism to suggest that personal experiences of women are due to institutional inequality. Consciousness raising groups, small gatherings where women shared experiences of sexism and developed a collective feminist critique, were a fundamental part of radical feminist organizing. Radical feminism also created non-hierarchical, consensus-based structures and processes. While activism was decentralized with no national leadership, groups did work together. Service organizations, such as domestic violence shelters came out of radical feminist organizing. Moreover, they argued in supreme court cases including in Canada that the potential harm pornography could inflict on women was more important legally than freedom of expression, holding that “pornography is the theory, rape is the practice”. By the end of the 1970s, differences between liberal and radical feminisms became muddied as liberal feminist organizations moved toward self-help and service organizations and radical feminist organizations became more hierarchical and centralized.

There was a split as part of the feminist development around sexuality. Lesbian feminism argued gender and sexuality were inexorably linked and work dialectically to reinforce partiarchal power. Much of radical feminist research supports the belief in fundamental differences between the sexes. Carol Gilligan’s book “In a Different Voice” for exemplar argued that women make different moral judgements to men, and radical feminists used this to support arguments that women were morally superior. The main critique of radical feminism is that it obscures differences between women, especially in terms of race, class, and nation. A second major critique is that it essentializes differences between men and women and thus reinforces and reifies gender roles and gender itself.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Structuralism](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Structuralism emphasizes the causal force of the relations among elements in a system or of emergent properties of their patterning The character of the elements themselves is ignored. Arising from this has been the idea that structuralism alone is the basis for distinguishing sociology from other disciplines.

Claude Levi Strauss popularized anthropological structuralism, with his method involving reducing expressive objects to contrastive structures in which elements were opposed to others, through which they were argued to be influenced by an abstract picture of the social structure in which they were produced. In his later work on Amerindian myths, he argued that myth was a system reflecting structuring habits of the human mind. This was seen as too systematic and scientistic by some scholars. Sociologist Guy Swanson argued that the structure of relations among organized groups in society determined how the spiritual world was conceptualized, showing for instance that the concept of a high god directing lesser spiritual agents occurred with frequency only in societies with a significant number of hierarchically organized sovereign groups, each having jurisdiction over an array of human affairs.

The Durkhemian strand of structuralism has devoted itself largely to explaining variation in expressive culture, while the Simmelian strand has more systematically attempted to define and map social structure to explain a wider range of social behavior. Network theories look at networks of social relation to explain an array of social phenomena such as the capacity of communities to mobilize politically. An implication of such theories is that occupants of positions connected to other positions in similar ways should behave similarly. Another approach holds that the skeleton of social structure is composed of different dimensions along which people are differentiated, which can also vary in the degree to which they allow interaction with diverse others. Greater intersection of dimensions seems to decrease the likelihood of intergroup conflict.

[Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology: Ideological Hegemony](https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1HdrJ6ylw-slSN-1Oj69CpJUkWZMwxXCF)

Ideological hegemony theorizes the way in which relationships of domination and exploitation are embedded in the dominant ideas of society. The concept sought to explain why workers were not gaining control of their states. Georg Lukacs was one of the earliest theorists of this, drawing a distinction between objective and subjective class consciousness. Objective class consciousness is the material interests of the working class, while subjective class consciousness is the actual ideas the working class may have. False consciousness is the gap between the two. Lukacs suggested due to this and the existence of classes between the proletarian and the bourgeoisie which could not ally with proletariats, a revolutionary consciousness couldn’t be attained in society. Thus, the hegemony of the bourgeoisie was maintained in all aspects of society.

Antonio Gramsci argued that perceptions and other mediations come between material forces and the meanings connected to them. This realm of ideas or superstructure (religion, legal structures, family, etc) is affected by the interests of the ruling class so they incorporate those interests without the appearance of doing so. Exploited people unwittingly adopt ideas for the status quo. Where hegemony is strong, capitalists only need to rely on popular consensus, but where it is weak, they have to rely on physical coercion. In the latter case revolutionary potential is higher, but they still need to develop counter hegemonies to accomplish their potential. He distinguished between a war of position and a war of maneuver as necessary parts of the counter hegemonic project, where position relates to minds. A victorious war of position makes a victorious war of maneuver possible.

Herbert Marcuse expanded Gramsci’s analysis, adding advertising, industrial management, and consumption itself as modes of hegemony. The diffusion of mass consumption mitigates oppositional behavior and critical thinking through the creation of false needs.

The notion that hegemony must be achieved by convincing people to accept its terms in civil society implies capitalists dominate the cultural sphere. As evidence, many empirical studies have shown that the highest levels of corporate, political, and cultural arenas are occupied by interlocking directorates. On the level of production, scholars have shown how submission to relationships of domination and exploitation on the shop floor is embedded in the act of work itself. For example, piece rates induce a proclivity toward competition and manipulation between workers, solidifying workers’ commitment to the status quo.

In terms of media, the format of television itself creates a view of reality impervious to radical change by proposing character themes fixed rather than developing in nature. The very act of consuming mainstream cultural transmission through TV precludes public discourse and encourages passive absorption of dominant ideologies. The theory of ideological hegemony implies there are limits to hegemony. For example Todd Gitlin has argued television shifted form the 1950s to 1970s towards discussing themes relating to sexism, racism, and poverty. However, this excluded voices of dissent by domesticating ideas away from those more radical and towards those easily co-opted. One study of American labor found that the presence of a progressive union can not only mitigate hegemonic ideology in the workplace but also initiate counter hegemonic orientations.

The notion of ideological hegemony often assumes a Marxist epistemology, and even when it doesn’t relies on the distinction between objective and subjective consciousness as they relate to exploitation. To the extent that exploitation in relationships remains an empirical question, studies of hegemony run the risk of tautology, with studies sometimes lapsing into reinterpretations of a given phenomenon from a critical perspective rather than conducting empirical investigations beyond that into whether such a reality exists to be covered up.

## Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

### Descartes, Rene

Descartes believed that people know some things and are capable of discovering fundamental things such as the basic nature of reality, but believed the methods taught in the schools of his time were deeply flawed. Aristotelian philosophy was wrong about how truths were to be gained, because it assumed falsely that the senses were reliable methods of finding the truth and that the senses are the only method of acquiring knowledge. Descartes held that the human mind is able to perceive the nature of reality purely intellectually. We must thus break away from the senses and start with the assumption cogito ergo sum: I think therefore I am. The essence of matter could be apprehended by innate ideas independently of any sensory image. Descartes assigned 2 roles to the sense in the acquisition of human knowledge. The first is that they are usually adequate for detecting benefits and harms for the body. Second, they have an essential role to play in natural philosophy. He claimed to derive the general principles of physics from the mind, such as the idea that the essence of matter is extension, but not other phenomena. In Descartes’ scheme of mental capacities, knowledge does not arise from the intellect alone, as it may present some things as truth but does not affirm or deny that truth. That function belongs to the will. Acts of pure intellect do not involve the body at all, those acts which do, such as sense perception as not acts of pure intellect. These acts are not as clear and distinct as acts of pure intellect.

Descartes held that he was able to as a general rule lay down whatever he perceived very clearly and distinctly as true. This is determined if when we consider the perception we cannot doubt it. In the face of genuine clarity and distinctness, a great light in the intellect is followed by a great inclination of the will. Still, he calls this into question and sets out to test the existence of a god, and if there is, if there is a deceiver. The answer to this question could undermine his method for determining truth severely. In his argument for the existence of a god, he suggests that there must be as much reality in the efficient and total cause as in the effect of that cause. Because the content of the idea of god is infinite, it must require an infinite being as its cause, and thus an infinite god must exist. He then equates an infinite being with a perfect being and argues that a perfect being cannot be a deceiver. However, one objection states that we can be sure that god exists only because we can clearly and distinctly perceive it, which makes the argument circular. Descartes responds to this by suggesting that the hypothesis of a deceiving god can only present itself when we are not clearly and distinctly perceiving the infinity and perfection of god, because when we are doing so we cannot help but believe that god is no deceiver. Descartes holds that the human mind comes supplied with innate ideas that allow it to perceive the main properties of god (infinity and perfection), the essence of matter, and the essence of mind. He denied that there are eternal truths which are independent of the existence of god or that are fixed in god’s intellect. Eternal truths are the free creations of god, originating from him in a way that does not distinguish among his power, will, and intellect.

Descartes’ ontology held there were 3 substances. The first and primary is god, whose essence is perfection. It is the only true substance, meaning the only one that can exist on its own. The other two substances are mind and matter, which are created by god and can only exist because god exists. The essence of matter is extension in length, breadth, and depth, and space does not exist separate from matter. Matter has the general attributes of existence and duration. Individual parts of matter have durations as particular modes, which are modifications of extended substance and include shape, size, position, and motion. The essence of mind is thought, which has the two chief powers of intellect and will. Intellect is divided into pure intellect, imagination, and sense perception. The will is divided into various modes, including desire, aversion, denial, and doubt. These always require some intellectual content upon which to operate. Descartes defines mind as the substance in which thought immediately resides. All thoughts are conscious, because we have reflective awareness of and can remember every thought we have. Consciousness is thus a mark of thought. Perception or representation is the essence of mind, and consciousness follows as a result of that essence. Descartes allows for unnoticed sensations and unnoticed mental operations in the mind.

Descartes holds that the mind and body are separate. He justifies this by asserting that he could imagine what it would be like if he didn’t have a body, but that he couldn’t imagine not existing. This is however fallacious as it is conceived in ignorance. He later changed his argument to distinguishing mind from matter where the former is unextended and the latter is extended. However, this substance dualism leads to problems as it is not clear then how these substances interact. This problem vexed Descartes. He did however discuss how they unify in the economy of life, how pain sensations for example warn us of bodily damage. As Descartes saw it, god or nature set up these relations for our benefit.

Descartes suggested the human intellect is generally reliable because it was created by god. Cognitive and moral errors result from human freedom, which is provided by god. Sensory errors are a product of god working as best as he could with the finite machinery that makes up people. Descartes initially defines material falsity as something that occurs in ideas, when they represent non-things as things. However, he allows that such ideas may be true in the sense of representing something positive in things, but that they may do so in a way that it becomes indistinguishable from a non-thing.

Descartes does not distinguish between living and non-living beings, but does distinguish between beings that have souls and those that don’t. Only humans have souls among earthly beings. Nonhuman animals according to Descartes are machines without sentience. He held that human physiology is similar to nonhuman animal physiology as regards both vegetative and some sensitive functions - those that do not involve consciousness or intelligence.

As per the new mechanical philosophy of Descartes, secondary qualities such as colors, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile qualities like hot and cold had to be changed. Descartes saw these as mechanical, such as how light is a property of particles and their motions.

### Gramsci, Antonio

Gramsci was a committed socialist and revolutionary critic, although as an intellectual skeptical of prevailing orthodoxies. He held that the liberal state’s fundamental shortcoming consisted in failure to build popular and inclusive governing institutions. There were several themes in his thinking throughout his pre-prison activities. First was a humanist opposition to scientific positivism and materialist determinism for its neglect of the subjective dimension to human action. Second was a radical insistence on the force of subjectively motivated collective action, expressed as the formation of a unified moral will. Finally was a preference for self-liberation and a rejection of authoritarian, elitist, or artificially imposed systems of rule. There are three sequential phases of his pre-prison thinking: his early cultural socialism, his post-war theory of the factory-based workers’ state, and his later developing reflections on communist party strategy.

Gramsci’s early writing was informed by the anti-positivist framework of neo-Hegelian philosopher Benedetto Croce. Croce invited a view of Italy’s political failings as the absence of a robust, unifying culture, a secular civic faith, rather than economic underdevelopment. Gramsci presented socialism not as the outcome of historical laws but as an integral vision of life, the adoption of an invigorating moral consciousness to supplant the failed bourgeois order. Gramsci regarded socialist’s appeals to historical progress as being rooted in an elitist attitude aimed at bringing reform to the masses from on-high, instead endorsing a grassroots self-organization based on the assertion of the integrity and moral autonomy of a uniquely proletarian worldview.

Gramsci’s theory of factory-based democracy, his first original initiative, took his earlier humanism in a more concrete, practical direction. In this model, a new type of state based inside the factories would replace the discredited parliamentary regime. This would be done through trade union organization which would replace the capitalist in his administrative function and industrial power, and so achieve the autonomy of the producer in the factory. Gramsci envisaged a participatory system of factory councils functioning in a hierarchical democratic system through which workers would relay and manage the practical needs of national life. A communal identity would have priority over individual initiative. Authority would be reconciled to liberty, not opposed to it, as under liberalism.

By the end of the occupations in 1920, Gramsci had already begun to shift away from advocating workers’ self-liberation. He committed to a hierarchical, centralized leadership and strict ideological discipline through a Bolshevik model of the revolutionary party. During this intellectual period, he began to develop an independent position that echoed fragments of his earlier thinking. This involved the rejection of formalistic reasoning that neglected specific historical conditions, attention to the Italian social structure and the distinctive, cultural-political role of intellectuals, and the necessity of a mass-based party that incorporated the southern peasantry. For Gramsci, the critique of formalism underscored his concern that the new party wasn’t reading the objective situation but rather imposing a rigid view deduced from abstract principle. The received model of revolution, a violent seizure of power in the midst of a catastrophic crisis, needed to be adapted to conditions that had not applied in Russia. Economic crises did not automatically lead to political instability because forces could be found to support the regime.

In his prison notebooks, his philosophical linchpin was the concept of hegemony, signifying both leadership and domination. Gramsci’s discussion of hegemony hinged in part on the empirical observation that capitalist rule in developed western states was increasingly founded on the generation of consent across civil society, not solely on coercion. In this, he drew a distinction between force and consent. This hegemony based on consent protected modern states from the threats to their rule caused by economic crises or civil disruption. Gramsci formulated this as state = political society + civil society (hegemony protected by the armor of coercion). This condition of hegemony also applied to proletarian formas of rule. Revolutionary transformation for any class, cannot be focused exclusively on the seizure of coercive and bureaucratic power but must engage the state’s wider system of defenses. A revolutionary project must first build consent across civil society before taking formal power. In place of the common Marxist division of economic structure and superstructure, Gramsci proposed the concept of a historical bloc, a composite of distinct class and social forces joined politically and culturally under a specific form of hegemony. It was possible to gauge the extent to which a class sacrificed its economic corporate interests in expanding its leadership across civil society, through assessing the relations of forces that combined structures and superstructures in a historical situation.

Intellectuals formed a major theme of the notebooks. Gramsci noted that intellectuals are the dominant group’s deputies exercising the subaltern function of social hegemony and political government. He defined intellectuals more broadly than academics or artists to include all those whose social function was to communicate with, and educate, non-specialists, including industrial technicians, managers, entrepreneurs, bureaucrats, and scientists. Gramsci distinguished between organic and traditional types: organic intellectuals emerged from a specific social class and functioned to elaborate that class’s productive activity as a set of general principles. Traditional intellectuals, such as philosophers or the clergy, were remnants of a former historical stage who retained social prestige but no longer directly served a productive class. Intellectuals were therefore rooted in material relations of production but undertook the critical elaboration of that activity into a new and integral conception of the world. The construction of hegemony requires both the elaboration of new organic intellectuals and the assimilation of traditional intellectuals.

Gramsci argued that popular attitudes should not be dismissed but rather understood as part of how ordinary people lived and experienced their world. The tendency among Marxists to diminish ideology and politics, reducing them to an immediate expression of an economic structure, was dismissed by Gramsci as primitive infantilism. Rather, ideology should be grasped as a conception of the world that serves to cement and unify human practice, which should be understood. Gramsci did this when discussing common sense, which for Gramsci denoted a largely uncritical and fragmentary mode of consciousness. Its danger was that it tended to invite resignation and passivity rather than collective action. Yet, common sense often had a healthy nucleus in good sense, in the practical and realistic attitudes that could be made more coherent and unitary if joined to a systematic and critical conception of the world. It was necessary not to dismiss common sense thinking nor the struggles of subaltern groups who were passive, but to critically engage the contradictory consciousness of ordinary people and educate it. Gramsci understood that educational task to belong to intellectuals. A hegemonic worldview had to connect to the simple to become embedded in everyday life.

The notebooks present a critique of what Gramsci saw as the prevailing orthodoxy of marxist ideology, presenting an alternative account of historical materialism he called the “philosophy of praxis”. He saw marxism as a philosophy aimed at critically engaging popular common sense, laying the basis for a new hegemony. Gramsci held that the “popular manual” reduced Marxism to become subordinated to the natural sciences. It failed to grasp the dialectic in Marxism, which underscored the critical struggle against undivided thought, and it separated thought from action, dividing intellectuals with knowledge from the experiences of the great popular masses. To remedy these problems, Gramsci argued that Marxism be understood as a philosophy rooted in history, as an expression of the practical struggle to rethink those circumstances anew. Thought and action should be understood as dialectically intertwined in a developmental process that can bring into being a new type of society. He also proposed that Croce’s idealism could be valuable to a philosophy of praxis, conceiving thought and expression as immanent to history. It would build on Croce’s insights which were pro-liberal in nature, instead focusing on “ethico-political” history, the socioeconomic divisions that dialectically bring a new culture into existence without his partial liberal gloss. Gramsci radically shifted Marxism’s epistemic bearings. The measure of historical materialism lay not exclusively in its empirical truth but also in the efficacy of its political and moral reform. Prediction was not simply a scientific act of knowledge but more the abstract expression of the effort made, the practical way of creating a collective will. Gramsci was not suggesting that truth was only a matter of shared agreement, as the philosophy of praxis still aligned to the Marxist principle that social consciousness corresponds to material relations of production, knowledge of which was necessary for any practical effort. Marxism therefore required the critique of ideologies which tend to hide reality. But the philosophy of praxis could only achieve this and unite thought and action if it were grasped as a form of politics, not an abstract science. This is consistent with Gramsci’s argument of the strategic importance of building consent prior to revolution.

Gramsci still considered the agent of revolution to be by necessity a centralized and ideologically disciplined party, but this would organize civil society in advance of the revolution itself. The character of the party could be grasped with reference to Machiavelli’s “The Prince”, in which the leader combined both tactical calculation and ambition to lead the people in building a state. The party would lead by making itself the repository of popular common sense, gathering the support of allied individuals, and developing its own distinct worldview built on the philosophy of praxis. It would be organized in a way to maintain contact with workers, but also to ensure disciplined leadership. To ensure organic discipline, Gramsci endorsed the principle of “democratic centralism” whereby decisions would be open to discussion by rank-and-file members. But once taken, those decisions would be unquestioningly obeyed. Gramsci held that hegemonic strategy invariably meant creating a new leading elite whose superior philosophy would be in the masses as such, only experienced as a faith.

### Lacan, Jacques

The theory of the three registers of the imaginary, symbolic, and real forms the framework for much of Lacan’s thought. His characterizations of each and their relations with each other undergo multiple revisions and shifts over the years of his labors.

Lacan tends to associate albeit not exclusively the imaginary with the restricted spheres of consciousness and self-awareness. Who and what one imagines other people to be what one thereby imagines they mean when communicatively interacting, who and what one imagines oneself to be, including from the imagined perspectives of others, all is encompassed under the imaginary. Lacan emphasizes the dependence of the imaginary on the symbolic, which means that more sensory-perceptual phenomena are shaped, steered, and overdetermined by socio-linguistic structures and dynamics. Lacan bounds up the imaginary with the other two registers. The imaginary invariable involves category mistakes, in which the other two registers are mistaken for each other. What is real is misrecognized as symbolic, such as seeing meaningless contingent occurrences as having deep significance to be deciphered and interpreted, and what is symbolic is misrecognized as real, such as unconscious mental conflicts encoded in language and ideas being suffered as bodily afflictions and ailments. It is not possible nor desirable however to liquidate the illusions of this register. The imaginary is integral to and has very concrete effects on human realities.

The Lacanian symbolic refers to the customs, institutions, laws, mores, norms, practices, rituals, rules, traditions, and so on of cultures and societies, with these things being entwined in various ways with language. Lacan’s phrase symbolic order, which encompasses all the preceding, can be understood as roughly equivalent to what Hegel designates as objective spirit. This non-natural universe is an elaborate sets of intersubjective and trans-subjective contexts into which individual human beings are thrown at birth, a pre-existing order preparing places for them in advance and influencing the vicissitudes of their ensuing lives. According to Lacan, one of if not the most significant conditions of possibility for singular subjectivity is the collective symbolic order (sometimes names the big other). Individuals are what they are in and through the mediation of the socio-linguistic arrangements and constellations of the register of the symbolic. The unconscious, being of a symbolic anti-nature in an of itself, is to be interpretively engaged with via the symbolic medium of speech, namely, the very substance of being-in-itself of the speaking subject of the unconscious. The Lacanian unconscious is structured like a natural language, but not any particular natural language. Lacan is reliant on the notion of the real sides of the symbolic, signifiers in their meaningless nonsensical materiality as visible marks and audible sounds, and this by contrast with the imaginary sides of the symbolic, in which signifiers are paired with signifieds to form meaningful significant signs.

The real is foreign to imaginary-symbolic reality, and is the realm containing conscious apprehension, communicable significance, and the like. It is intrinsically elusive, resisting by nature capture in imaginary-symbolic signs. It is as Lacan stresses an impossibility. In Lacan’s phase of prioritizing the real, the new real involves convergences of opposites as a register of volatile oscillations and unstable reversals between excesses and lacks, surpluses and deficits, flooding presences and draining absences. Lacan puts forward the figure of the mother as the key analytic referent justifying this rendition of the real. In the beginning of the psychial-libidinal subject’s ontogentic life history, the maternal caretaker is at one and the same time, both very stiflingly near and frustratingly, uncontrollably absent or inaccessible. There is never the right balance amount. The mother at this archaic real other, becomes the forever unattainable sovereign good, the fixed vanishing point of all desiring. The real throughout Lacan’s thought took on an ever increasing number of aspects and connotations. It becomes both a transcendence troubling and thwarting imaginary-symbolic reality and its language from without as well as an immanence perturbing and subverting reality/language from within. It comes to be associated with libidinal negativities, material meaninglessness both linguistic and non-linguistic, contingent traumatic events, unbearable bodily intensities, anxiety, and death. Later in Lacan’s thought, real dimensions are added to the unconscious, with its symbolic dimensions being made to orbit around black holds of un-symbolizability impossible to represent via the signifier-like ideational representations of the language-like sides of the unconscious. The rise of the real in Lacan’s teachings odes not amount to him converting to any sort of analytic recapitulation of mysticism or negative theologies. Instead, for Lacan, analysis both theoretical and clinical permits delineating and tracking the real with conceptual precision, if only as an exercise in pinpointing the exact limits of the imaginary, symbolic, and their overlappings.

Lacan offers the narrative of the mirror stage as an explanation for the genesis and functions of the ego. The ego is an object rather than a subject, meaning that the ego is not a locus of autonomous agency. Lacan opposes Anglo-American ego psychology, with the ego psychologists seeking to strengthen their patients’ egos by appealing to supposed autonomous and “conflict-free” sides of these psychical agencies. Against this, Lacan views the ego as thoroughly compromised and neurotic, as a passionate defense of a constitutive ignorance of the unconscious. Lacan eventually forges a distinction between the ego and the subject. The ego is an inert fixed bundle of objectified coordinates, a libidinally invested and reified entity. By contrast with the ego and the illusory sense of fictional selfhood it supports the subject is an unconscious kinetic negativity defying capture by and within ego-level identificatory constructs. The subject of the unconscious speaks through the ego while remaining distinct from it. Returning to a focus on the mirror stage, Lacan posits that children between the ages of 6-18 months quickly acquire the ability to identify their own images in reflective surfaces, and are yet helpless. This initial stage of helplessness entails the infant experiencing a swirl of negative affects, such as anxiety, distress, and frustration. To the young child motivated by these negative affects, a crucial component of the enthralling lure exerted by the fascinating image of his/her body is this image’s promise that they can overcome their helplessness and be a unified, pulled-together whole like the more mature others around them. However, according to Lacan, individuals spend their entire lives chasing in vain this unattainable state of harmony and mastery first falsely promised by the mirror. Identification with the image of the ego entails alienation. The infant is encouraged to identify with the mirror image, which causes said alienation. The imaginary register of the mirror does not precede the symbolic register of language and sociality in a linear chronology of developmental states. If anything, socio-linguistic variables such as the words and body language of parents are the causal triggers of the child’s investment in select sensory-perceptual experiences such as the body image in the mirror. The imagistic nucleus of the ego is suffused from the get-go with the destinal “discourse of the other”, such as with saying “you’re going to grow up to be big and strong, just like your daddy”. Lacan thus considers the recognition that happens in the mirror stage to amount to misrecognition. The ego is not only a congealed heteronomous object rather than fluid autonomous subject but also in its very origins a repository for the projected desires and fantasies of larger others. The child’s image is a receptacle for his/her parents’ dreams and wishes, with his/her body image being always already overwritten by signifiers flowing from the libidinal economies of other speaking beings. The ego is ultimately exterior, insofar as it crystallizes “the desire of the other”. Lacan’s utilization of the mirror is not exclusively literal, and can also be other people’s speech, gestures, postures, moods, facial expression, and so on which can frequently be said to mirror back to one an image of oneself.

Lacan uses two versions of “other”, one which is the imaginary ego and its accompanying alter-egos. The other meaning (with a capital O) refers to two additional types of otherness corresponding to registers of the symbolic and the real. The first type is Lacan’s “big Other”, the overarching objective spirit of trans-individual socio-linguistic structures configuring the fields of inter-subjective interactions. The symbolic big Other can refer to often fictional ideas of anonymous authoritative power and/or knowledge, such as god or science. There is also a Real dimension to Otherness. This is the provocative perturbing enigma of the Other as an unknowable “x”, an unfathomable abyss of withdrawn-yet-proximate alterity. For Lacan, the Freudian Oedipus complex stages the drama of the child’s laborious struggles to situate him/her-self through all three register-theoretic dimensions of Otherness. In the Lacanian version of the Oedipus complex, the maternal figure initially features for the infant as a Real Other, an obscure omnipotent presence who is the source of all-important love. But because of her obscurity and importance, the mother qua Real Other is also a source of deeply unsettling anxiety for the very young child, as she is always either too smothering or too withdrawn. In the infant’s anxiousness about controlling the ultimately uncontrollable presence and absence of the maternal Other, the child confronts the question of what the mother wants. The infant’s gradual formation of an ego is in part a response to this riddle, with the child constructing an ego-level identity informed by the perceived wants of Others in relation to the mother, such as the father. Lacan’s Oedipal father is an Other with both symbolic and real faces. On the symbolic side, the paternal figure represents the answer to the question of what the maternal Other wants. Lacan redefines the phallus (not the penis) as the structural function of whatever thing the child hypothesizes the paternal figure possesses making him the focus of the maternal figure’s decide, the possession enabling the father to domesticate and control the mother’s otherwise unpredictable desire. Also at the symbolic level, the paternal function involves bringing to bear within the child’s familial sphere the disciplinary and prohibitory features of the family’s enveloping symbolic order as their socio-linguistic milieu. Freud in his reconsideration of earlier renditions of the Oedipus complex, came to highlight an asymmetry between Oedipal dynamics for young boys and girls, repudiating the idea of girls undergoing an “Electra complex” as the symmetrical counterpart to the Oedipus complex, something Lacan preserves. Thus, Lacan introduces the idea of sexuation as the real of sexual difference, which is what is responsible for the absence of an exhaustively representable, symbolizable natural and/or cultural relationship between sexuated positions. Masculinity and femininity embody constitutively out-of-synch and inherently incommensurable subjective stances, incompatible yet interacting arrangements of distinct sorts of libidinal economies.

Need, demand, and desire form a conceptual-terminological triad in Lacanian theory. Needs are biologically innate vital requirements for the human being as a living organism. When a child is pre-maturationally helpless it must articulate its needs to bigger others, such as crying. Even at this early stage the infant is forced to rely on his/her thus-addressed significant others to interpret the meaning of their communications. These lend the child’s noises and movements the significance of being demands. As the infant continues maturing, soon acquiring language, the influences of other and Others increasingly exert themselves on the forming of associative connections between needs and demands, such as proper articulation of needs. The child must make demands couched in terms and conventions imposed by others’ socio-symbolic regimes. Lacan stipulates that desire is what remains after need is subtracted from demand. Through being translated into demands, needs come to be saddled with surpluses of more-than-biological significances. Vital requirements take on the excess baggage of meanings over and above the level of brute, simple organic survival. Largely by virtue of what others add to the child’s experiences of needs through superimposing interpretations of these needs as socio-symbolic demands, the meeting of the child’s needs in response to their demands makes these needs into litmus tests of where they stand in relation to these thus-addressed significant others. Getting food from a parent signifies both that the parent understands the child’s need and that they love the child. Returning to demand - need = desire, what is desired when a demand is addressed to another is not so much the meeting of the thus-expressed need but in addition to this the very love of another. Parents of children are familiar with seemingly endless series of demand from the little ones. Adults are also aware of a similar desiring restlessness in themselves, an inability to acquire an object or attain a success that would satisfy them for good. Similarly, an adult in a romantic relationship never is content with being told that they are loved by the beloved only once, they insist on repetitions ad infinitum. What is being requested is an impossibility, there is nothing that really is “IT”. The intervention of the signifiers of the symbolic order is integral to the genesis of the need-demand-desire triad. In connection with his revisions of the Oedipus complex, Lacan turns Freudian castration into symbolic castration. The latter, rather than being a real of imagined scene in which a specific threat to bodily integrity is issued, designates the dual somatic and psychical discombobulating effects upon the premature human animal caused by insertion into and subjection to surrounding socio-symbolic contexts, of being made to depend on the foreignness of signifiers and everything they being with them.

In Freud’s drive theory, sublimation amounts to a drive finding a means to secure satisfaction in the face of aim-inhibition. But as Lacan observed, Freud also oddly defines the aim of any and every drive as satisfaction. Therefore, how can a drive achieve satisfaction if its aim defined as the achievement of satisfaction is inhibited? Lacan’s response is to distinguish between the aim and goal of the drive. While the aim of a drive can be and inevitably is inhibited, its true goal always is reached, and this because its goal is nothing other than enjoying the ceaseless movement of repetitively rotating around whatever blockages land on its path. According to a widely accepted reading, Lacan distinguishes between desire and drive. An essential characteristic of desire is its restlessness, no object it gets its hands on is ever quite IT. However, drive derives a perverse enjoyment from this desire-fuelled libidinal circling around the vanishing point of the impossible-qua-unattainable. Drive gains its satisfaction through vampirically feeding off of the dissatisfaction of desire. Jouissance is a notion that is difficult to encapsulate in succinct defining formulas. It’s almost always left untranslated, since its English equivalent, “enjoyment,” fails to capture the specifically sexual connotations of the original French word. Lacan’s jouissance is beyond the pleasure principle. Freud muses that all drives might be said ot be death drives, meaning that each drive perhaps works at least in certain respects at certain times, contrary to the pursuit of the pleasurable as balance, gratification, homeostasis, satisfaction, and so on. The Lacanian drive extracts “enjoyment” from the thwartings and failures of desire. Whereas the latter is oriented by the tantalizingly elusive telos of pleasure qua satisfaction, the former generates its jouissance-beyond-pleasure precisely through the inhibiting of desire itself. There are many easily imagined sadistic and masochistic implications of this side of the libidinal economy. One of several things pushing Freud into dethroning the pleasure principle as the formerly hegemonic ruler of the psyche in its entirety is repetition compulsion, the psyche’s perplexing, spontaneous compulsive repeating of that which is painful and/or traumatic and the recurrent types of self-defeats unconsciously arranged by neurotics for themselves. One of the theoretical functions of the death drive is to account for whatever disregards or disrupts the reign of the pleasure principle. In Lacan’s conceptual apparatus, jouissance sometimes likewise refers to an overriding force/tendency compelling repetitions of experiences or events upsetting the calm, delicate equilibrium of psychical subjectivity’s imaginary-symbolic reality, hence the association of jouissance with the real. In the process of the neonate as a biological being acquiring both an ego and a speaking subjectivity, the human supposedly loses through symbolic castration access to an immediate, undiluted jouissance in its raw, unmitigated intensities. Whether this is an actual factual occurrence or a retrospective fantasy is a complicated issue in Lacanian theory. The jouissance presumably lost to the speaking subject returns only in the guises of what might be labeled “limit experiences”, namely, encounters with that which is annihilating, inassimilable, overwhelming, traumatic, or unbearable. Similarly, jouissance, in this vein, is related to transgressive violations, the breaching of boundaries and breaking of barriers. It is difficult if not impossible for the being in itself to accommodate, tolerate, and digest. The speaking being is forced to cohabitate uneasily with its always problematic jouissance.

Lacan treats fantasies, particularly those functioning at the level of fundamental formations of the unconscious, as schematizations of desiring subjectivity. This fundamental template/scene is an unconscious formation operating as a transcendental condition of possibility for the subject’s libidinal economy in all its crucial, symptomatic manifestation. Lacan’s matheme for the fantasy is $ ◊ a. The $ stands for the subject of desire brought into being by the barring/splitting consequences of Others’ mediating influences. The a is the object-cause of desire, causing select objects to be desired as stand-ins for IT. However, these substitutes are always inadequate and unsatisfactory. ◊ can be read as a condensation of 4 symbols: ^, the logical symbol for conjunction; v, the logical symbol for disjunction, >, greater than, and <, less than. These all represent possible variants of this positioning of $ vis-a-vis a. In this context, a refers primarily to the little-o-other as the imaginary ego. The ego is an other, a not-me misrecognized as me. There is a thread of continuity between the a of the mirror stage and object a: both ego and fantasy unconsciously are the subject’s fateful answers to the questions, what does the other want, and how must i position myself with respect to the desire of the other. Lacan’s a is deliberately handled as akin to an algebraic variable, a placeholder for any number of particular types of determinants. In all cases though, a reflects Lacan’s slogan having it that “man’s desire is the desire of the Other”.

### Machiavelli, Niccolo

Machiavelli did not consider himself a philosopher and had no systematic analysis in his writings. Still, he was very influential in philosophy.

It has been a common view among political philosophers that there exists a special relationship between moral goodness and legitimate authority, rulers did well when they did good. Machiavelli critiques this in his work The Prince. For him, authority and power, as opposed to authority and goodness, are coequal. Thus, the only real concern of the political ruler is the acquisition and maintenance of power. Only by means of the proper application of power can individuals be brought to obey and will the ruler be able to maintain the state in safety and security. While good laws and good arms constitute the dual foundations of a well-ordered political system, the legitimacy of law rests entirely upon the threat of coercive force. Thus, Machiavelli believes it is better to be feared than loved by subjects, and violence and deception are superior to legality in effectively controlling them. He holds that politics can only be coherently defined in terms of the supremacy of coercive power, and justifies this by appealing to self-interest at the core of all human conduct. The ruler who lives by his rights alone will surely wither and die by those same rights, because those who prefer power to authority are more likely to succeed. The successful ruler needs training to ensure that obedience is achieved.

The term “virtu” best captures Machiavelli’s vision of the requirements of power politics. While this is usually translated to virtue, Machiavelli obviously means something different, referring to the qualities that the prince will find it necessary to acquire to maintain his state and to achieve great things, two standard markers of power. The ruler of virtu is bound to be competent in the application of power. The conceptual link between virtu and effective exercise of power lies in another Machiavellian concept, fortuna (usually translated as “fortune”). Fortuna is the enemy of political order, the ultimate threat to the safety and security of the state. Machiavelli’s usage of fortuna is a malevolent fount of human misery and disaster. While human fortuna may be responsible for such success as human beings achieve, no man can act effectively when directly opposed by the goddess. Fortuna may be resisted by people, but only in circumstances in which virtu and wisdom have already prepared for her inevitable arrival. Fortuna demands an aggressive or violent response of those who would control her. Fortuna is irrational.

The most extreme reading of Machiavelli is that he rejects traditional morality in favor of might makes right. A more moderate school views him as simply a pragmatist or realist, in which morality is suspended within the domain of politics. Another stance sees him as disinterested in ethics and more interested in how political life factually operates. Rousseau held that the real lesson of The Prince was to teach people the truth about how princes behave and thus to expose rather than celebrate the immorality at the core of one-man rule. A similar range of opinions exist in connection with Machiavelli’s attitude toward religion. Machiavelli was no friend of the institutionalized Christian church as he knew it. He holds that traditional Christianity saps from human beings the vigor required for active civil life. However there is debate as to whether he was in favor of Christianity in general or not.

Machiavelli’s state remains a personal patrimony, a possession more in line with the medieval conception of dominium (private property or personal domination) as a foundation of rule. Thus the state is literally owned by its ruler. Moreover, the character of governance is determined by the personal qualities and traits of the ruler, hence his emphasis on virtu as indispensable for the prince’s success. However, Machiavelli’s prince comes to power not by dynastic inheritance or popular support, but purely as a result of his own initiative, skill, talent, and/or strength. This is a precarious position, since Machiavelli insists that the throes of fortune and the conspiracies of other men render the prince constantly vulnerable to the loss of his state. It’s not clear whether Machiavelli believed that a prince of complete virtu could exist, as he sometimes seems to imagine that said prince develops a psychology that’s inhuman. The required flexibility yields the advice to exclude no course of action out of hand, but be always ready to perform whatever acts are required by political circumstance. Machiavelli doubted this could be done by people. All successful case studies of rulers he points to were inflexible which resulted in their downfall, and their courses of action are not generalizable. This makes it questionable whether Machiavelli’s advice was even practical in this respect.

Machiavelli distinguishes between a minimal and full conception of “political” or “civil” order, constructing a hierarchy of needs in communal life. A minimal constitutional order is one in which subjects live secretly, ruled by a strong government which holds in check the aspirations of both nobility and people, but is in turn balanced by other legal and institutional mechanisms. In a fully constitutional regime, however, the goal of the political order is the freedom of the community, created by the active participation of, and contention between the nobility and the people. Liberty is thus valued by Machiavelli, and only a republic can cause this goal to be attained. This is because while in France in which a nobility and Parlement exist ensures a balance of power in which the people cannot be oppressed, it still remains incompatible with liberty, due to some individuals wanting freedom only to oppress others. The law-abiding character of the French regime ensures security, but it must never be confused with liberty, even though it is desirable. A state that makes security a priority cannot afford to arm its populace for fear that the masses will employ their weapons against the nobility or perhaps the crown. Yet at the same time, such a regime is weakened irredeemably since it must depend on foreigners to fight on its behalf as opposed to its people who are disarmed. In this sense, any government that takes security as its goal generates a passive and impotent populace, which can never be free. The liberty of a state is thus contingent on the military preparedness of its subjects. While the king of France disarmed his people to make them more easily commendable, this makes them weak and limits liberty. 

Machiavelli believes a weapons-bearing citizen militia remains the ultimate assurance that neither the government nor some usurper will tyrannize the populace. He is confident that citizens will always fight for their liberty against internal as well as external oppressors. This is precisely why French monarchs have left their people disarmed. In a fully developed republic such as Rome’s, where the actualization of liberty is paramount, both the people and the nobility take an active and sometimes clashing role in self-government. Customarily the blame for the collapse of the Roman republic has been assigned to warring factions that eventually ripped it apart. But Machiavelli holds that it is precisely these conflicts that generated a creative tension that was the source of Roman liberty. Therefore, these should be looked upon as a necessary inconvenience. Machiavelli thinks that other republican models like those adopted by Sparta or Venice will produce weaker and less successful political systems, ones that are either stagnant or prone to decay when circumstances change.

Machiavelli has confidence in the capacity of people to promote communal liberty. In the Discourses he argues that a people is more prudent, more stable, and of better judgment than a prince, as well as more concerned about and more willing to defend liberty than either princes or nobles. Ordinary citizens are more inclined to object to defend the common liberty. One of the main reasons for why liberty is preferable to security according to Machiavelli is that he views speech as the method most appropriate to the resolution of conflict in the republican public sphere, with in the Discourses him suggesting that debate being the best means for the people to determine the wisest course of action and the most qualified leaders. The tradition of classical rhetoric directly associated public speaking with contention, a theme seen with Machiavelli who believed that contention is a prerequisite of liberty. By contrast, monarchic regimes exclude or limit public discourse, thereby placing themselves at a distinct disadvantage. It is far easier to convince a single ruler to take a disastrous or ill-conceived course of action than a multitude of people. Machiavelli held that the Romans were able to maintain liberty and order because of the people’s ability to discern the common good when it was shown to them. They are also better qualified to make decisions than are princes because the people can never be persuaded that it is good to appoint to an office a man of infamous or corrupt habits, while a prince may easily and in a variety of ways be persuaded to do this. Should the people depart from the law-abiding path, they may readily be convinced to restore order by the speech of a good man.

Machiavelli’s arguments in favor of republican regimes also appeal to his skeptical stance toward the acquisition of virtu by a single individual, a practical limitation in single-ruler regimes. In the Discourses, Machiavelli provides a psychological case that the realities of human character tends to favor a republic over a principality, since the former is better able to adapt itself to diverse circumstances than a prince owing to the diversity found among its citizens. Changing events require flexibility of response, and since a single person cannot do this, the republic offers a viable alternative in which people of different qualities fit different exigencies. Still, Machiavelli points out that there is a limitation in republics in that people are also inflexible themselves. Thus, institutions in republics change very slowly relative to the times. If the downfall of principalities is the fixed structure of human character, then the failing of republics is a devotion to the perpetuation of institutional arrangements whose time has passed. It is not assessed in the Discourses whether it is possible to hold out for the creation of more responsive republican institutions. It’s not clear how all of this squares with The Prince, which Machiavelli never repudiated.

### Marcuse, Herbert

In his dissertation of 1922, the artist represents a form of radical subjectivity. Marcuse makes a distinction between epic poetry and the novel. Epic poetry deals with the origin and development of a people and culture while the novel focuses on alienation from social life. The artist experiences a gap between the ideal and the real, whose gap produces a sense of alienation in the artist which becomes the catalyst for social change. However, dialectically, while art embodied revolutionary potential, it was also produced, interpreted, and distributed in a repressive society, and one produces the conditions for the other. This doesn't mean that there will never be a point of time in which liberation happens, but that analysis or critique of society must come to terms with how things actually work at that point for liberation to be possible. Culture, which is the domain of art, develops in tension with the overall structure of a given society. The values and ideals produced by culture call for the transcending of oppressive social reality. Culture separates itself from the social order, that which is characterized by labor, the working day, the realm of necessity, operational thought, etc. The freedom to think and reflect that is made possible at the level of culture makes it possible to construct values and ideals that pose a challenge to the social order, which is the emancipatory function of art. However, art itself does not bring about liberation, it must be translated into political activity. The separation between culture and society does not suggest a flight from social reality, but an alien or critical space within social reality. In affirmative culture art becomes the object of spiritual contemplation. The demand for happiness in the real world is abandoned for an internal form of happiness, the happiness of the soul. Thus, bourgeois culture creates an interior of the human being where the highest ideals of culture can be realized. This inner transformation does not demand an external transformation of the real world and its material conditions. In such a society the cultivation of the soul becomes an important part of one’s education, which leads to political resignation insofar as freedom becomes internal. Marcuse holds that art as art expresses a truth which although not in the domain of radical praxis, are nonetheless essential components of revolution, even if it is not proletarian art specifically. For Marcuse and the Frankfurt school there was no evidence that the proletariat would rise up against their oppressors. The need for social change includes class struggle but cannot be reduced to class struggle. Orthodox marxism, which Marcuse opposed, focused on the proletariat by excluding all other possible sites for revolution, which means that orthodox Marxism itself becomes a form of ideology and produces a reified state of affairs. Orthodox marxist aesthetics ignores how the need for radical change must be rooted in the subjectivity of individuals themselves and argues that radical subjectivity is reduced to one social group, the proletariat. Marcuse greatly expands the space where radical subjectivity can emerge, which constitutes itself in the inner history of the individuals. Each subject as distinct from other subjects represents a particular subject position. Radical subjectivity and art may come from any of these positions, as they can be positions of repression and dehumanization.

Marcuse developed phenomenological marxism in response to what has been called the crisis of marxism, the reality that the proletarian revolution predicted by Marx seemed like it wasn’t going to happen. The Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 was not led by the proletariat and simply produced a different form of totalitarianism. The scientific reductionism of marxism encouraged by Engels and Karl Kautsky, its epistemological crisis, ends up being non-revolutionary to the extent that the subjective factor of working class consciousness is downplayed. Marcuse gravitates toward marxism because it is an attempt to rescue subjectivity or humanity from the reifying, oppressive forces of capitalism. Marcuse saw in Marx and Heidegger a demand for radical action, needed to overcome the oppressive, repressive, and reified structure of advanced industrial society. Marcuse read this oppressive structure through three lenses, the Marxian lens of alienation, the Likacsian lens of reification, and the Heideggerian lens of inauthenticity. Marcuse believed that Heidegger’s philosophy of existence possessed the conceptual lens required to counteract an inverted social world in which social relations between men assume the fantastic form of a relation between things. Marcuse read Heidegger’s philosophy as an ontologically veiled critique of reification, an indictment of the way in which oppressive social circumstances militate against the possibility of human self-realization. However, Marcuse later became disillusioned with Heidegger, whose philosophy was not all that concrete. While Heidegger’s philosophy explicated the ontological structure of Dasein in its everydayness, it never dwelled at the ontic level. Marcuse sees that Heidegger avoids the type of analyses that would reveal systems of oppression and domination from which many human beings suffer. The modes of existence for Dasein have a social, historical, and political context that shape the way they are experienced, but Heidegger gives no account of the multiple forms of oppression and domination present in advanced industrial societies nor the way that individuals respond to these forms of oppression and domination. Although Marcuse broke with Heidegger in 1932, for some scholars the break is not all that clear.

Marcuse holds that according to the 1844 Manuscripts by Marx the revolution itself requires the development of radical subjectivity, the development of a form of self-consciousness that finds present social and economic conditions intolerable. Marx and Hegel provided Marcuse with a philosophical anthropology (study of human nature) that discloses human essence and the social mechanisms by which it is distorted. According to them, humans develop through a self-formative process where the external world is appropriated and transformed according to human needs. Labor is one of the main areas for this self-formative activity. This idea is what distinguishes Marx from the classical economists, who hold that labor is simply the means by which individuals make provisions for themselves, and is not an activity by which the human subject is constituted. Instead of having their subjectivity affirmed, the individual becomes an object that is now shaped by external human forces, as a consequence of capitalism. The affirmation of subjectivity is concealed.

According to Marcuse, the purpose of dialectical or negative thinking is to expose and then overcome by revolutionary action the contradictions by which advanced industrial societies are constituted. The problem of concealment occurs here because not only does society produce contradictions and the forms of domination that come with them, but also produces the social and psychological mechanisms that conceal these contradictions. An example of a social contradiction is the co-existence of the growth of national wealth and poverty at the same time. The capitalist belief that unbridled competition is good for everyone conceals the goal of purging society of competition by allowing large corporations to buy out their competition. In this situation, the worker does not become a free and rational subject through their labor, but rather an object to be used by the economic system, a system that is a human creation but over which the worker has no control. The worker does not reap the full benefits of production. Marcuse argues there is no human essence apart from historical context. Essence is embedded in this historical appearance insofar as the potential for the worker to be free from exploitation and alienating toil is present as a real possibility that need only be actualized. 

Materialist theory thus transcends the given state of fact and moves toward a different potentiality, proceeding from immediate appearance to the essence that appears in it. Essence presents itself as the possibility of a free non-alienating, non-repressive form of life within a particular historica, social/political structure. Appearance (the present order of things) is in contradiction to the very possibilities that are produced by the present social reality. Negation1 is the negation of human essence or freedom by an oppressive, repressive socioeconomic system. Negation2 refers to the development of critical, revolutionary consciousness that seeks to negate these oppressive social structures with the goal of liberation.

From the beginning of the Frankfurt school psychoanalysis was an essential theoretical tool used to attempt to understand the psyche of the working class. The goal was to understand why those who would benefit most from a revolution of social change seemed to resist it. Marcuse did not engage in psychoanalysis until later. Marcuse holds that Freud’s pessimism that the evolution of civilization is the evolution of ever greater repression fails to develop the emancipatory possibility of his theory. First he must show that human instincts or drives are malleable, and secondly that repressive society also produces the possibility of emancipation. The instincts can be repressed already suggests that society plays a role in shaping the instincts, which means they cannot be fixed. Freud claims that it was the program of the pleasure principle that decided the purpose of life, but it was suppressed by the external world. For Marcuse, liberation means a freeing up of the pleasure principle, although some repression is necessary for humans to co-exist.

Basic repression is repression or modification of the instincts that is necessary for the perpetuation of humans in civilization. This does not lend itself to domination or oppression. Surplus repression is the restrictions necessitated by social domination, whose purpose is to to shape the instincts in accordance with the present performance principle which is the prevailing form of the reality principle. The performance principle is that of an acquisitive and antagonistic society in the state of constant expansion. For a long way, the interests of domination and the whole coincide, but eventually alienation occurs where men do not fulfill their own needs but perform pre-established functions. Work in a capitalist society extends itself beyond what is required for the satisfaction of the worker to what will maximize profit for the capitalist. Although Marcuse’s theory of repression is useful for understanding why we haven’t entered a revolutionary period, it falls short of explaining how desires are manipulated in such a way that one-dimensional identities are formed. Foucault critiques Marcuse, holding that forms of subjectivity or identity are not a result of repression of some primordial desire, but rather identities are formed through power and certain discursive practices. In this process, knowledge is not repressed but rather called forth or produced.

Marcuse puts Freud in opposition to the rest of western philosophy. Whereas western philosophers such as Kant put things ahead of happiness, such as duty, Freud rejects this suppression of happiness. Western philosophy subdues desire to reason, while Marcuse holds they should be seen as equal.
Marcuse analyzes western society dialectically, holding that it produces the necessary conditions for freedom while also producing greater oppression. Individual workers continue to engage in alienating labor although their labor has produced enough wealth to sustain them without ongoing toil. All the wealth goes to a small minority who own or control the means of production. The very existence of scarcity in this age functions ideologically and supports the domination of the worker by the capitalist.

Both Freud and Marcuse recognize that repressed instincts never go away, but continue to assert themselves in one way or another. Marcuse holds that the erotic drive for happiness and pleasure lives on in fantasies, art, and utopian visions. It is through the imagination that we can envision a better world. At the prognostic level, Marcuse argues for a fusion of logos and eros, the “rationality of gratification”. Here, the struggle for existence is based on cooperation and free development and fulfillment of needs.

Negative thinking is two-dimensional as it sees the contradictions by which society is constituted, and it is aware of forces of domination. One-dimensional thinking does not demand change nor does it recognize the degree to which the individual is a victim of forces of domination in society. The idea of democratic unfreedom refers to the free acceptance of oppression and surplus repression. Marcuse goes beyond Freud’s theory of the superego. According to Freud, the superego develops through the internalization of the values of some authority figure. According to Marcuse, the authority figure is no longer needed. The superego has become depersonalized and is no longer fed by authority figures. The function of one-dimensional thinking is to produce a one-dimensional society by whittling down critical, two-dimensional consciousness. This is accomplished in several ways, including making citizens feel like they were more free than they are, providing citizens with enough goods to keep them pacified, making citizens identify with their oppressors, and eliminating political discourse. Another example of one-dimensional thinking is “repressive tolerance”, where ideas, terms, or concepts that have their origin in struggles for liberation can be co-opted and used to legitimate oppression. This has occurred with the term tolerance itself.

For Marcuse, modern technology, a product of the enlightenment, embodies a tension between its own project of liberation and its own new mechanisms of oppression and domination. He distinguishes between technology (a mode of production) and technics (the technical apparatus of industry, transportation, communication, etc). Technics are the devices or instruments that are used to transform nature in the service of human beings. Technology is situated within a certain ideological structure. Technics is not neutral as it is situated within technology. Under capitalism, technics and its governing technological ideology is based on the performance principle of competition and production and must serve the goals set by this performance principle. The use that is made of technology is ideologically shaped by the present reality principle. It is this oppressive/repressive reality principle that shapes the telos of technological development. A new sensibility, a reshaping of human relationships with each other as well as nature would usher in a new reality principle.

Marcuse was seen as the lead academic of the 1960s student protests, yet he rejected this label, saying that he was learning as much from the movements as they were learning from him. The student protests of the 1960s were a form of great refusal to multiple forms of repression and domination. This new society requires what Marcuse calls the new sensibility which is an ascension of the life instincts over the aggressive instincts. Marcuse was interested in the feminist movement which he saw had the potential for radical social change. The process of rethinking femininity and masculinity could be the beginning of redefining male subjectivity so that it develops in a way that males become less aggressive.

One of the criticisms of Marcuse is that he gave into pessimism and gave up on the working class as a revolutionary subject. Instead, he took to the substratum of outcasts and outsiders for any social change, such as the feminist movement. His hope was that the struggle for the liberation of women would create a new type of performance principle and aid in the cultivation of a new sensibility. In short, certain feminine qualities would replace brutish, violent masculine qualities. Marcuse advocated a form of androgyny. One of the main criticisms of Marcuse’s attitude towards feminism is that he simply reinforces gender stereotypes as he falls back into essentialism. However, he argues that although so-called feminine categories are social constructs, they can still be universalized in a way that all human beings develop a new sensibility.

### Nietzsche, Friedrich

Nietzsche engaged in a very broad critique of traditional European moral commitments together with Christianity. In his time, it was common for European intellectuals to assume that morality needed a rational secular grounding, which would surely be forthcoming and save the large majority of our shared commitments. Nietzsche found this confidence naive. He famously said “God is dead”, not to suggest that atheism is true, but that the belief in the Christian God has become unbelievable, and thus everything built from it, including morality, falls apart. Not only do standard moral commitments lack a foundation we thought they had, but they are positively harmful. Worse, these commitments have implanted themselves in our psyche as a form of genuine self-understanding, making it difficult to imagine any alternatives. We have to come to terms with this while also somehow continuing to sail the ship of our common ethical life on the high seas. Nietzsche takes up the idea that moral consciousness consists fundamentally in altruistic concern for others, and observed that this isn’t the essence of any possible morality, but a historical innovation. He identifies two patterns of ethical assessment, one a good/bad pattern, and another a good/evil pattern. The good/bad pattern has goodness originate in social class privilege, the good are those of a higher social class who then are said to have good traits of character and other personal excellences typically associated with the privileged caste. In such a system, goodness is associated with exclusive virtues. Nietzsche shows that this pattern of assessment was dominant in ancient Mediterranean culture. The good/evil pattern evaluates what is evil as violating the interests or well-being of others, and what is good as based on altruistic concern for others welfare. This morality has universalistic pretensions, amenable to ideas of basic human equality, that each person has an equal claim to moral consideration and respect. This is the common understanding of morality today. Both of these patterns are in stark contrast with one another. He insists we went from the former to the latter as a result of a “slave revolt in morality”. People who suffered from oppression at the hands of the noble people valorized by good/bad morality, and who were too powerless to have effective recourse, developed a persistent emotional pattern of resentful hatred against their enemies, “ressentiment”. This led to the development of good/evil morality for the purpose of condemnation of those enemies. For Nietzsche, thus, our morality is a vindictive effort to poison the happiness of the fortunate instead of a concern for others. Nietzsche offers two strands of evidence for this. First is the surprising prevalence of a brimstone, hellfire, and damnation diatribe in Christian letters and sermons, despite Christianity being a religion supposedly about love and forgiveness. Second, Nietzsche notes that much of punishment comes not from a consideration of harm but often devolves into a free-floating expression of vengeful resentment against some real or imagined perpetrator. Nietzsche suggests that guilt bears a close resemblance to the notion of debt, because when you’re guilty, you feel like you owe the victim some form of response to the violation, which serves as a kind of compensation. The accompanying purification and internalization of the feeling of guilt is suggested to be a potential reasons for why the noble also adopted the good/evil form of morality. A purified notion of guilt pertaining to what is completely under the agent’s control stands in tight fit with the notion of blame. The impulse of assigning blame is central to ressentiment. Thus, guilt ties into the re-evaluation of morality. One psychological consequence of guilt is that its very purity leads one to feel it even in circumstances in which there is no actual connection to a victim, which can lead to a pathological desire for self-punishment. This is intensified through the idealization of asceticism, which seems incomprehensible on psychological egoistic or hedonistic grounds. However, it is widespread in religious practice. What unifies all the versions of it is their extension of the valorization of self-discipline in the interest of virtue (which Nietzsche would advocate for)) into a form of self-condemnation, in which self-discipline is turned against oneself and used as an expression for one’s own worthlessness. One obvious route to such a system is for the moralist to identify a natural set of drives and desires people have and to condemn those as evil. Purified guilt is naturally recruited as a tool for developing asceticism. Since guilt involves a serious diminution of personal worth, the effects of this guilt-inflected ascetic self-understanding must be extremely psychologically destructive. While Nietzsche paints asceticism in a bad light, he does not refute it. Under Schopenhauer’s pessimistic view of the world in which human life has negative value, even if asceticism is psychologically bad it might be better than the alternative, which is embracing human life which is itself bad. Nietzsche does not so much refute as diagnose this. Nietzsche attacks compassion as observing that compassion centers attention on the problem of suffering, when suffering can in fact promote growth and strength. Suffering in this respect can in fact be good.

Nietzsche’s ideas on value creation were less clear than his critiques on traditional values, although he still has many ideas. They just seem scattered. It is common to explain values by contrasting them against mere desires, where values are objective and desires are subjective. Nietzsche challenges this by suggesting values are created rather than discovered in the real world. However, it is not clear how he reconciles this with his ubiquitous insistence that his own value judgments are correct and superior to others. Some take his insistence as efforts at rhetorical persuasion rather than objective claims, others take his Nietzsche to be suggesting that values are self-consciously created to satisfy our needs as valuing creatures even though all evaluative claims are strictly speaking false, still others suggest that values are attitude-dependent and gain some kind of objective standing once those attitudes have done their work and created the values. Many of Nietzsche’s passages connect value creation to artistic creation, suggesting that Nietzsche took artistic creation and aesthetic value as an important paradigm or model for his account of values and value creation more generally.

It’s also unclear what values Nietzsche wants to positively promote. One plausible explanation is that Nietzsche rejects that philosophy should offer a highly systematized account of the good. Nietzsche praises many different values and does not follow the strategy of deriving his evaluative judgments from one or a few foundational principles. However, Nietzsche nonetheless throughout his texts shows that he highly praises several values. The closest Nietzsche comes to systematizing his values is his insistence on the importance of power, and related ideas like strength, health, and life. One of Nietzsche’s central ideas is the “will to power doctrine”, which includes the proposal that life aims at the enhancement of its power, which is good for us. Many interpreted this to mean might makes right, although following the second world war, Walter Kaufmann engaged in a long-term campaign to recuperate his ideas by insisting on how the forms of power emphasized by Nietzsche involve internally directed self-control and the development of cultural excellence, rather than domination of others. However, this approach threatens to sanitize aspects of Nietzsche’s philosophy which were intended to pose a stark challenge to our moral intuitions. More sophisticated versions of this approach distinguish between tyranny (domination to the point of effacement) and mastery (domination to allow some expression to those less dominant but to control and direct that expression to domination’s own larger ends). One approach suggests Nietzsche’s conception of power is overcoming resistance, which connects power directly to the person’s ability to reshape their environment in the service of their ends. This provides a more intuitive sense of why Nietzsche thought that power was good and why this can lead to a mode of existence worthy of endorsement rather than frustration as Schopenhauer had it. Another strand of interpreting Nietzsche’s will to power involves a more ethical idea in which power is understood as a tendency toward growth, strength, domination, or expansion. However, this raises concerns about a Millian utilitarian reconstruction of Nietzsche’s will to power, when Nietzsche takes us to be committed to a wide diversity of first-order aims, rather than purely power. If we look at power more broadly to mean that growth, strength, power-expansion and the like are all manifestations of life, then a Millian reconstruction can be avoided. This position can be read as a form of ethical naturalism, in which these are good precisely because they are our basic tendencies and we are inescapably in their grip.

Another value prominent in Nietzsche’s work is affirmation of life. Nietzsche suggests that we give up on reproaching others directly and just focus on seeing that our own influence balances and outweighs theirs, and look away. Nietzsche believed our life is only good if upon imagining its return in every detail, we can affirm it as it is. This affirmation goes well with Nietzsche’s critique of Christianity that it condemns earthly existence. These negate our life, instead of affirming it. The affirmation of life can be framed as the rejection of nihilism, which involves rejecting life-negating values while also articulating life-affirming values. In order to affirm our life and the world, we have to be honest about what it is really like, which means that Nietzsche’s value of life affirmation simultaneously commits him to honesty. Nietzsche often recommends the pursuit of knowledge as a way of life. He assigns the highest cultural importance to the experiment testing whether such a life can be well-lived. Nietzsche emphasizes connections between truthfulness and courage, as honestly is marked by resoluteness, determination, and spiritual strength. This is consistent with Nietzsche’s widespread attacks against the Biblical ‘proof of strength’ in which belief “makes one blessed”, something Nietzsche holds is cognitively corrupt and a manifestation of irresolution and cowardice. He attacks the alleged mendaciousness and intellectual corruption of traditional religio-moral consciousness as one of the very worst things about it. The dishonesty of the slave revolt is a constant theme. Even when Nietzsche raises his doubts about this commitment to truthfulness, these are clearly motivated by the central importance of said value, and even in the face of such worries, Nietzsche does not give up on the value. Instead he calls for a critique that will experimentally assess its value and legitimacy. That experiment can be no other than the life of the thinker, the question about the extent to which truthfulness can endure incorporation and be made compatible with life. The question of the value of truth can only carry such central significance because in Nietzsche’s eyes the honest devotion to truth was both so indispensably valuable and potentially dangerous.

While truthfulness is a core value for Nietzsche, he also suggests we need illusion to live, which is what art provides. Art teaches us how to make things beautiful and desirable for ourselves when they are not. What makes a life valuable includes its aesthetic features. It is that a person’s character manifests an artistic plan, it has beauty or sublimity and its moments of ugliness have been gradually removes that constitutes its value. In Nietzsche’s presentations, truth and art appear to stand in opposition with each other, in that the substantive truth about the world might be disturbing enough to demand some artistic salve that helps us cope. According to him, if we did not have the arts, the realization that delusion and error are conditions of human knowledge and sensation would make life unbearable. Honesty would lead to nausea and suicide. Truthfulness leads us to this realization, the realization of the impossibility of truthfulness. This can only be solved with the counterbalance of art. Thus, it seems that Nietzsche endorses conflict with one another.

Nietzsche places heavy value on individuality and the independence of “free spirit” from confining notions of society, religion, or morality. Still, he resists any thought that every single human person has value on the strength of individuality alone. Self-interest is worth as much as the person who has it. Some hold that valuable individuals possess given natural characteristics that admit no or not much further explanation. Others take it to require that an individual possess a kind of ideal or norm to which they may or may not live up to. Others attempt to combine both or hold that Nietzsche’s notion of the overhuman is simply characterized by internal contradiction. A different approach looks at Nietzsche’s connection between individuality and freedom of spirit. Valuable individuals would be the ones who give themselves laws, who create themselves, who exhibit self-control, and who are able to stand for their own future.

In some cases, Nietzsche’s many values reinforce one another. However, they remain irreducible to a single value that explains them all. This however fits nicely with another value of Nietzsche, which is pluralism. For Nietzsche, a person’s ability to deploy and be responsive to a multiplicity of values, virtues, outlooks and perspectives is a positive good in its own right.

Nietzsche was preoccupied with a probing investigation into the psyche, and held that psychology should be recognized as the queen of the sciences. His critique of morality rested on psychological analyses, and his positive claims about values detail the psychological conditions he thinks would be healthier for both individuals and cultures. Nietzsche is extremely skeptical that there is any such thing as a “self” or “soul” as well as the existence of its alleged basic capacities of thinking, willing, and feeling. At the same time, his own psychological analyses make free appeal to not only the self but also to said traditional faculties. For instance, his favored strategy of deploying a multiplicity of perspectives in knowledge assumes the existence of a cognitive self that stands back from particular drives and affects, and so can control one’s pro and con and dispose of them in support of the larger cognitive project. Some interpret this from a strong naturalist perspective in which people only have basic drives and a fundamental nature to them. Others use a Cartesian conception of consciousness while rejecting cartesian dualism to suggest that Nietzsche’s claims about psychology should instead be read as a kind of physiology of drives that rejects mental psychology altogether. Others still suggest that despite Nietzsche’s skepticism, he still held that man had something like a Kantian transcendental ego. Nietzsche’s actual psychological explanations rely heavily on appeals to sub-personal psychological attitudes, most importantly drives and affects. Drives are dispositions toward general patterns of activity, while affects are emotional states that combine a receptive and felt responsiveness to the world with a tendency toward a distinctive pattern of reaction. Typically, these sub-personal attitudes represent the world in one way or another. He endorses Leibniz’s thought that representation, not consciousness, is the mark of the mental, and thus it is reasonable to treat these attitudes as distinctively psychological, whether conscious or not. Nietzsche insists that we should give the finishing stroke to what he calls “the soul atomism”, which is the belief which regards the soul as something indestructible, eternal, indivisible, as a monad. He rejects such atomism, the soul as he understands it will be internally complex rather than simple and therefore subject to disintegration. The drives and affects are supposed to serve as the constituents comprising this multiplicity. Nietzsche constructs these as what the psyche or self arises from, as opposed to the constituents arising from the psyche or self. In these respects, Nietzsche’s psychology treats the self as something that has to be achieved or constructed, rather than as something given. The project of individual self-creation is located at the heart of Nietzsche’s philosophical agenda according to one interpretation. This would suggest that the main goal of Nietzsche’s new philosophers, highlighting his commitments to artistry and individuality, would be to construct novel, interesting, and culturally resonant individual lives whose shape they could affirm on the strength of the aesthetic value they instantiate. On another reading, Nietzsche was a disunified or even disintegrating agent who saw value in that and whose works develop a strategy for constructing a meaningful life that is suitable for people of that sort.

Nietzsche is known for having a very strange writing style which still contains a strong level of richness. It’s mainly short parts within books which often have little relation to one another. There is little unity in many of his books. Some of Nietzsche’s efforts consist in straightforward psychological analysis, but many Nietzschean aphorisms rely on a twist effect. The first part sets up a certain expectation which is then controverted or deepened by a thought-provoking reversal in the second part. These aphorisms stand out from their background context making it harder to integrate Nietzsche’s discourse from one section to the next. His texts are confusing in a wide variety of other ways which require active engagement and subtlety from the reader. However, trains of thought connect one section to another through large swaths of works. It can be argued that the creation of such a narrative persona is central to Nietzsche’s larger project of authorial self-fashioning. An example of this could be seen in how intensely he blasts Christianity, sneering between scare quotes and repeatedly charging bad faith and dishonesty on the part of his opponents. His work in which he does this, The Geneology of Morality, cannot be concluded to not be deliberately designed to be as offensive as possible to any Christian believer. Perhaps the best way to understand this is that it operates as a strategy for audience partition. In Nietzsche’s mind, those who cannot do without Christianity and its morality would only be harmed by understanding how bad it is. He wants to explain these terrible effects but also wants to protect Christianity-dependent readers from harm. He does both at once by being extreme.

The will to power doctrine claims that the activity and interactions of everything exists fundamentally on the basis of “power centers” and are explained by a principle that they pursue the expansion of their power. However it is not clear what power-centers are supposed to be. Some take this as Nietzsche’s metaphysics, others suggest it is an anti-essentialist rejection of traditional metaphysical theorizing in which abstract and shifting power-centers replace stable entities or else as a psychological hypothesis. Another interpretation is that this is an expression of Nietzsche’s values. However, this doesn’t explain Nietzsche’s concept of power-centers, which are sometimes abstract, evoking mathematically characterized force-centers like those sometimes postulated in 19th-century physics, but at other times, concrete psychological or biological entities are the things exerting will to power. Another account suggests the will to power is a drive toward overcoming resistance. Under this reading, Nietzsche’s views about power are aimed against Schopenhauer’s ideas about the will to life and his use of those ideas to motivate pessimism. This, the will to power contributes directly to Nietzsche’s program of combating nihilism. This also makes good sense of the apparent centrality of the will to power in Nietzsche’s psychology.

Much of Nietzsche’s reaction to the philosophy of his predecessors is mediated through his interest in the notion of perspective. He thought that past philosophers had largely ignored the influence of their own perspectives on their work, and had thus failed to control these perspectival effects. Nietzsche is motivated by perspectivism. While criticizing past philosophers, he also holds that the operation of perspective makes a positive contribution to our positive endeavors. He rejects the idea, dominant in philosophy at least since Plato, that knowledge essentially involves a form of objectivity that penetrates behind all subjective appearances to reveal the way things really are, independently of any viewpoint whatsoever. Instead, the proposal is to approach objectivity asymptomatically by exploiting the difference between one perspective and another, using each to overcome the limitations of others, without assuming that anything like a view from nowhere is so much as possible. In working out his perspective optics of cognition, Nietzsche built on contemporary developments in the theory of cognition. The Kantian thought was that certain very basic structural features of the world (space, time, causal relations, etc.) we know were artifacts of our subjective cognitive faculties rather than properties or relations of things in themselves. But while he treated these structures as necessary, the a priori conditions of any possible experience whatsoever, Nietzsche sought to trace them to sources in human empirical psychology, which would of course be contingent. The potential of these interminable subject-side influences to vary suggests the idea of treating them as a kind of perspective. For Nietzsche, perspectives are always rooted in affects and their associated patterns of valuation. For this reason, Nietzsche holds that every great philosophy so far has been the personal confession of its author and a kind of involuntary and unconscious memoir. Thus, theoretical claims need not only be analyzed with reference to truth, but can also be diagnosed as symptoms and can thus be traced back to drive and affect from the point of view of which they make sense. This therefore connects to his genealogical program of critiquing philosophical theories by exposing the psychological needs they satisfy. Nietzsche makes perspectivist claims not only concerning the side of the cognitive subject, but also about the side of the truth or reality we aim to know. Some scholars emphasize Nietzsche’s apparent denials of truth (either that truth is not knowable or that the very idea of truth is incoherent) and others highlight his claims for the truth of his own views, as well as the valorization of truthfulness and honesty. Some ways to reconcile this include the supposition that at least some of Nietzsche’s own claims must fall outside the scope of his denials of truth, that he distinguished between different senses of truth, and that he eventually gave up on his denials of truth late in his career.

Nietzsche argues the eternal recurrence was his most important thought, which involves hypothesizing that all events in the world repeat themselves in the same sequence through an eternal series of cycles. It has been argued that this was never a cosmological or theoretical claim but a practical thought experiment designed to test whether one’s life has been good, such as how the question of whether one would marry again evokes and demands an assessment of the state of the marriage.

### Popper, Karl

Popper held that the central problem in the philosophy of science was demarcation, distinguishing between science and non-science. He accepts the Humean critique of induction and argues induction is never actually used in science. All observations are theory-laden. Popper substitutes induction as the characteristic method of science for falsifiability: A rule or theory cannot be proven with any amount of evidence but it can be disproven with a single piece of evidence. Thus, all genuine scientific theories make universal claims. Science in Popper’s view, starts with problems rather than observations.

Popper distinguishes between the logic of falsifiability and its applied methodology, as methodologically, it can be difficult to decide whether an apparently falsifying observation is in fact falsifying. As such, Popper allows for the fact that in practice a single conflicting or counter-instance is never sufficient methodologically for falsification. Popper describes the concept of a “basic statement” or “basic proposition”, which takes the form “there is an X at Y”. These can play the role of potential falsifiers, but can also be falsified in themselves. He acknowledges this results in an infinite level of testing, and suggests that at some point testing ends in a convention-based decision to accept a basic statement or statements. While such a decision is usually causally related to perceptual experience, it is not and cannot be justified by such experience, and is thus underdetermined. Still, the agreed acceptance of basic statements remains susceptible to the requirement for further interrogation.

Because science starts with problems and theory comes first, Popper places special emphasis on the role of creativity in theory formulation. It is only the testing of theories which involves logical technique, not the formulation of theories. Popper identifies 4 steps in the deductive procedure. The first is formal, a testing of the internal consistency of the theoretical system. The second is semi-formal, an investigation of the logical form of the theory to see whether it is empirical or scientific or for example tautological. The third is the comparison of the new theory with existing ones to see whether it constitutes an advance on them. If it explains everything the existing theory does and additionally explains some previously anomalous phenomenon or unsolvable problem, it is an advance. It has greater empirical content and thus greater predictive power. The fourth and final step is the testing of the theory by empirical application.

Popper holds that science values theories with a high informative content, because they possess a high predictive power and are thus highly testable. Because of this, scientifically better theories are more improbable. Popper also argues that all scientific criticism must be piecemeal, so it is not possible to question every aspect of a theory at once as certain items of “background knowledge” must be taken for granted. He holds we cannot be absolutely certain that one is questioning the right thing, and thus background knowledge should be questioned when the need arises. Popper was initially uneasy with the concept of truth because all theories are open-ended hypotheses, which means they are at least potentially false. However, he accepted the correspondence theory of truth, particularly the metallurgical concept of “truthlikeness”, in which a theory’s content is the totality of its logical consequences, which can be divided into two classes. These are the truth- and falsity-content of a theory, which are the class of the theory’s true and false consequences. Theories which more closely approximate truthlikeness are considered to be better than other theories, even if they are falsified. However, it has since been demonstrated that the conditions specified by Popper for comparing the truth and falsity contents of theories can be satisfied only when the theories are true, as in the case of false theories, a false theory which has excess content over a rival theory, both the truth and falsity content of the former theory will excess that of the latter. Popper suggests that this problem cannot be solved by purely logical means, although his method can still be used as a good heuristic.

Popper insists on the objectivity of scientific knowledge, and is hostile to psychologist approaches to epistemology. In this, Popper situates the development of knowledge in the context of animal and human evolution. He represents the creation of theories by a tetradic scheme, in which there is an initial problem, a tentative theory designed to solve it, attempts at error elimination, and then further problems that arise out of the critical process. This kind of knowledge development, Popper argues, cannot be explained by physicalism in which all mental processes and states are material, or by dualism, which explicates knowledge by means of psychological states. He proposes a “Three Worlds” ontology, which allows for these two worlds and then a third world which represents knowledge in its objective sense as an objectively real ontological category. World 3 is the world of human cultural artifacts which are products of world 2 mental processes, usually instantiated in the physical world 1 environment. He distinguishes between the subjective sense of knowledge, which belongs to world 2, and the objective sense of knowledge, which belongs to world 3. Popper suggests that world 3 objects are not abstractions from world 2 thought processes because world 3 objects are necessarily more than the thought processes that led to their creation. Moreover, they can stand in logical relationships to each other which makes them amenable to critical rational analysis. Popper wasn’t concerned about the semantics of whether world 3 objects were actually real and objective, and thus was content to express his account as world 3 objects being abstract objects with their physical embodiments being concrete objects.

Popper understood holism as the view that human social groupings are greater than the sum of their members, which act on their members and have independent laws of development. Historicism he identified as being the view that history develops according to certain laws, such as Marx’s dialectical materialism. Historicism attempts to understand social groupings only in terms of the internal principles which determine its development. Popper called “The Historicist Doctrine of the Social Sciences” the view that the social sciences are there to make predictions about the social and political development of man, and that the task of politics is to lessen the problems of such developments. Popper views this as being misconceived and socially dangerous, as it can give rise to authoritarianism and totalitarianism. Against this, Popper advances the view that human groupings are only the sum of their individual members, and that history is the largely unforeseeable result of the actions of such individuals. In an open society, the rights of the individual to criticize policy will be safeguarded and upheld, undesirable policies will be eliminated in a manner analogous to the elimination of falsified scientific theories, and political differences will be resolved by critical discussion and argument rather than coercion.

Popper argues historicism and holism have their origins in the dream of prophecy, in which people hope that they can know what the future has in store for them. In relation to the concept of prediction, Popper distinguishes conditional scientific predictions (if X takes place, then Y) and unconditional scientific prophecies (Y will take place). The natural sciences are characterized by the former. Popper held that the latter are possible because they are derived from a combination of conditional predictions and existential statements specifying that said conditions have been fulfilled. He argues that the historicist does not derive his historical prophecies from conditional scientific predictions. Historicists cannot take unconditional scientific prophecies because unlike observations in the natural sciences, human society and human history are not isolated systems and are continually undergoing rapid, non-repetitive development.

An additional mistake that Popper discerns in historicism is the failure of the historicist to distinguish between scientific laws and trends. Historical change can be explained by discovering trends running through past history and an anticipation and prediction of future occurrences on the basis of such observations. However, a scientific law is universal in form while a trend can be expressed only as a singular existential statement. Neither conditional or unconditional predictions can be based upon trends. This does not mean however that trends have no practical utility value, but a trend is something which itself ultimately stands in need of scientific explanation and cannot therefore function as the frame of reference in terms of which an unconditional prediction can be based. Popper points out that the evolution of human knowledge has played a role in the historical development of human society. However, no scientific predictor can possibly predict its own future results, which means that no society can predict its own future states of knowledge. Because of the logical shortcomings of historicism, Popper argues against large-scale planning of social structures. It is theoretically as well as practically misguided, as part of what we are planning for is our future knowledge, which is not something we can in principle now possess. This critique of historicism and holism is positively balanced by Popper’s affirmation of the ideals of individualism and market economics and his strong defense of the open society, the view that society is he sum of its members, the actions of individuals shape society, and the social consequences of intentional actions are very often and very largely unintentional. Popper advocates for what he terms “piecemeal social engineering” as the central mechanism for social planning, in which intentional actions are directed to the achievement of one specific goal at a time, which makes it possible to determine whether adverse unintended effects of intentional actions occur, to correct and readjust when this proves necessary. This goes hand in hand with negative utilitarianism, the attempt to minimize the amount of suffering and misery. The positive task of increasing social and personal happiness by contrast can and should be left to individual citizens.

Popper took criticism of his theories very seriously and spent much time addressing them. Popper’s account of basic statements constitutes a form of conventionalism in its own right, which means that it is unclear that it is compatible with scientific realism, the view that scientific theories give true or approximately true descriptions of elements of a mind-independent world. This can mean that Popper’s falsificationism can eliminate true theories and accept false theories. Additionally, Popper’s theory of demarcation hinges on the assumption that there are such things as critical tests. However, as Lakatos argues, many theories are highly resistant to falsification, being protected from refutation by a vast protective belt of auxiliary hypotheses. Popper’s distinction between the logic of falsifiability and its applied methodology does not do full justice to the fact that all high-level theories grow and live despite the existence of anomalies, which are not taken as an indication that the theory in question is false. Third, Popper’s critique of Marxism has been challenged on the grounds that Marx did not hold many of the tenets of historicism identified by Popper and that it could arguably be the philosophy best calculated to promote the ideals of the open society. Moreover, scientific laws are usually expressed by universal statements (all A’s are X) which are thus concealed conditionals (if anything is an A, then it is X). Since scientific laws are non-existential in nature, they cannot in themselves imply any basic statements, since the latter are explicitly existential. Thus, the question arises as to how any basic statement can falsify a scientific law, given that basic statements are not deducible from scientific laws in themselves. Popper answers that scientific laws are always taken in conjunction with statements outlining the initial conditions of the system under investigation. These latter, which are singular existential statements, yield hard and fast implications when combined with the scientific law. This reply is adequate only if it is true as Popper assumes that singular existential statements will always do the work of bridging the gap between a universal theory and a prediction. Hilary Putnam has argued that this is false, in that in some cases the statements required to bridge this gap (auxiliary hypotheses) are general rather than particular, and consequently that when the prediction turns out to be false we have no way of knowing whether this is due to the falsity of the scientific law or the auxiliary hypotheses. The worker scientist always initially assumes it is the latter, which explains why scientific laws are highly resistant to falsification, unlike what Popper suggests. Popper’s final position is that he acknowledges it is impossible to discriminate science from non-science on the basis of falsifiability alone, as scientific theories are predictive and consequently prohibitive only when taken in conjunction with auxiliary hypotheses, and also recognizes that readjustment or modification of the latter is an integral part of scientific practice. Thus, his final concern is to outline conditions of when such modification is genuinely scientific and when it is merely ad hoc. Marxism is now not unscientific simply because it was modified later on ad hoc, but because it according to Popper was done so in an ad hoc fashion.

### Rand, Ayn

Ayn Rand’s philosophy is in essence the concept of man as a heroic being whose purpose is his own happiness, productive achievement his noblest activity, and reason his only absolute. Capitalism is the only system compatible with this because according to her it is the only system which treats people as ends in themselves. She was very popular with non-academics and not well respected by academics due to her highly polemical style which failed to consider objections and did not have significant analytical rigor.

Fundamental to her outlook is the trichotomy of three categories which make up her philosophy of objectivism: the intrinsic (whose nature depends on factors wholly external to the mind), the subjective (whose nature depends on factors wholly internal to the mind), and the objective (which depends on the relationship between mind and environment). Rand holds that many try to ignore the objective or assimilate into the subjective, which explains a lot of problems in philosophy which involve fruitless debates over intrinsic or subjective domains when the phenomenon is actually objective. Her ethics stresses the supremacy of living beings over all other considerations, as does her metaphysics and epistemology.

Rand holds that ethics is a code of values to guide man’s choices and actions. She believes that no one before her has given a scientific explanation for why to have values. The concept of value presupposes an entity capable of acting to achieve a goal in the face of an alternative, and the basic alternative of any living being is life or death. Therefore, metaphysically life is the only phenomenon that is an end in itself, a value gained and kept by a constant process of action. Survival is the organism’s ultimate value. Ethics is an objective, metaphysical necessity of man’s survival. An entity’s values are determined by their own intrinsic life needs, its requirements for survival. Thus, values are not intrinsic nor subjective but objective or relational, the nature of the entity and the nature of its environment. People through living accept life as valuable, because any other ultimate end if not life, if consistently adhered to, would lead to death. Virtue is the act by which one keeps or gains values in light of a recognition of certain facts. Therefore, rationality is the fundamental moral virtue, implicated in all other virtues, including productiveness. Rand is credited by objectivists for having solved the is-ought problem. But if the choice to live is a moral choice, in the sense that we ought to choose to live, then the argument is an ought to an ought. If the choice to live is a non-moral choice, then there is no justification for living being a moral choice, and suicide can never be wrong. More fundamentally, the very idea of morality resting on the choice to live is questionable, as most of us rarely if ever make a choice to live but rather live by default. Children don’t consider this choice at all, and yet still live, which suggests it is a default state. Some of Rand’s statements suggest she held that survival required morality, and happiness was the result or reward of a life long lived, and that life itself was the ultimate end, although this is simply one of many interpretations.

If survival is the ultimate value, non-survivalists make a number of objections. First, survival is not the ultimate goal of living beings as many will sacrifice themselves for the sake of reproduction. Second, even if survival was the source of all our values, it does not follow that survival must be the ultimate psychological and moral goal to which all other values are merely means. Third, many dictators have been immoral for their own survival. Morality enhances the chances of survival under normal circumstances but not always. Fourth, a survivalist ethics can at best support a bare-bones hobbesian morality, much less than everything Rand adds onto it. If everything Rand adds onto it was required, humanity would have perished long ago. Fifth, many of Rand’s heroes such as John Galt risk their lives for the sake of values that make their life worth living. With a lot of Rand’s writings, it is more fair to suggest that Rand held that morality is required for surviving qua human being, living a life proper to a human being.

Under this definition one must accept the three cardinal values of reason, purpose and self-esteem as the realization of one’s ultimate value, one’s own life. Rand suggests virtue is only a means to value. The virtue of productiveness becomes the central example of purpose, reason becomes its source, and the virtue of pride becomes its result. Rand defines rationality, the basic virtue, as in terms of the recognition and acceptance of reason as one’s only source to knowledge and guide to action. By this definition, the virtue and value entail each other, they are both the means to and realization of one’s ultimate value. However, this contradicts Rand’s claim that virtue is not an end in itself. Eudamonists object and argue that since even a long virtuous life need not be happy, positing it as the final end contradicts Rand’s claim that happiness is the goal and reward of life. It also contradicts Rand’s proclamation of happiness as the purpose of life. Eudaimonists hold that the dominant and/or more plausible view expressed in Rand’s writings is that happiness, a happy life, is the ultimate value. It involves virtue but is not identical with virtue.

Happiness is a product of rationality and is also a form of life-affirmation. A virtuous life is essential to happiness and is also a shield against soul-wracking unhappiness. In keeping with eudamonist’s richer conception of the final end, Rand’s novels also employ a richer conception of virtue as an integrated intellectual-emotional character trait to think, feel, and act in certain ways, rather than simply as an act in light of a recognition of certain facts. According to Rand, emotions are neither raw feelings nor inherently irrational but rather automatized value-judgments. But our emotions are only as good as our reason.

The chief objectivist virtues are rationality, integrity, honesty, justice, independence, productiveness, and pride. Rationality is the basic virtue of which the others are derivatives. Rand states that charity is not a major virtue or moral duty, nor is presumably kindness, generosity, and forgiveness. It can never be moral to knowingly sacrifice oneself for the sake of something of less or no value to oneself, such as another person. However, it is good to help others when the degree of sacrifice is minimal. Rand even makes some concessions to “common sense morality” when she states it is good to help a neighbor going through a hard time till he can get back on his feet if we can afford to and if we have no reason to think he is undeserving. Nathaniel Branden tries to reconcile charity with egoism by declaring that the former stems from a species-identification with another. This is true, but it ignores the fact that charity is first and foremost profoundly other-regarding. Rand in fact in her own life was often extremely generous not only towards friends but also strangers. Just as rationality is at the heart of every virtue, so irrationality, evasion of reality, is at the heart of every vice. Rand justifies virtue in both instrumental and non-instrumental terms, though without distinguishing between them. The instrumental arguments show the existential and psychological rewards of virtue and costs of vice. The non-instrumental argument which is largely immune to objections that sometimes vices can have rewards is that to compromise morally is to compromise one’s own objectively conceived happiness, because no existential loss can compare to the loss of moral integrity. This depends of course on the prior instrumentalist justification however. Despite all of this, Rand does not think we are morally obligated to martyr ourselves to fight evil, just that we are obligated not to be complicit in evil, or betray our values.

According to Rand, the only alternative to being rationally self-interested is to sacrifice one’s proper interests either for the sake of others (altruism) or for the sake of the supernatural (mysticism). She argues that the basic principle of altruism is that service to others is the only justification of man’s existence. Kant’s ethics is a secularized mysticism due to its categorical commands and duty for duty’s sake. As a moral code, altruism is impractical because its requirements are contradictory to the requirements of life and happiness, both the agent’s and other people’s. Rand suggests that the widespread equation of altruism and morality (in a way somewhat similar to Neitzsche’s analysis) was due to preachers and theorists of morality wanting to control and manipulate others by playing on their guilt.
Rand says that force and mind are opposites, and holds that no man may initiate the use of physical force against others, only in retaliation and only against those who initiate its use. This applies to individuals and the government. Rand’s ideal society is one of independent individuals who respect each other’s rights to life, liberty, and property and who trade value for value, materially and spiritually. She holds that rights are the means of subordinating society to moral law, moral principles defining and sanctioning a man’s freedom of action in a social context. Like the mind-body dichotomy, the common dichotomy between human rights and the right to property is a false one, because to own one’s life is to own one’s actions and their fruits. Like other libertarians, both left and right, Rand opposes state regulation of morality as well as forced service to the state. Critics have pointed out that if we have rights only because we need them for our survival and happiness, then we have no right to take actions that are contrary to our survival and happiness, such as suicide. Yet the freedom to do only that which is morally good or rational is no freedom. However, another interpretation is that we have rights because they are needed for our survival and happiness. Another criticism of Rand’s rights is that it is incompatible with her ethical egoism, because respect for others rights cannot be justified as a means to the ultimate end of one’s survival, at least not in all cases. On the eudaimonistic interpretation of Rand this is not a problem. While everything here suggests that Rand believes individuals have rights even in nature, she later suggested that rights only exist in society, although she later recants this and changes it to say that in the absence of government we don’t have objectively defined laws that can determine if a right has been violated, and a means to objectively control retaliatory physical force. Rand argues the only just sociopolitical system is laissez-faire capitalism, which has a separation of state and economics. State regulation of the market corrupts both states and markets, just as state regulation of religion corrupts both states and religious institutions. She does credit capitalism for creating widespread prosperity, but this is only because it leaves individuals free to produce in peace. Rand rejects the criticism that capitalism leads to a small few at the top which would hurt everyone else, because in laissez-faire capitalism competition will flourish and prevent concentration of power in a few hands. Rand holds there is no conflict between one person’s rational interests and another’s, and thus there is no conflict between their rights. Rand defines government as an institution that holds the exclusive power to enforce certain rules of social conduct in a given geographical area. A proper government is the means of placing the retaliatory use of physical force under objective control. Such a government is minimal, intended to protect us from criminals and foreign aggressors, and enforcing individual rights and contracts with the help of police and armed forces, using objectively defined civil and criminal courts and laws. In Atlas Shrugged Rand depicts her utopia, Galt’s gulch as a voluntary association of men held together by nothing but every man’s self interest, without any formal organization. The trader principle states that a voluntary, mutually beneficial exchange between independent equals is the only basis for a mutually respectful and rational relationship, and is also the only basis for a mutually respectful and rational relationship. It is also the only basis for peaceful relationships among countries, or among emotional relationships. However, it would seem the trader principle is unequal between parent-child, as the child receives both pleasure and material support from the parent. It is also unclear how the trader relationship applies at all to a severely disabled child who is rendered a source of pain rather than pleasure.

Objectivism holds that women are and ought to be recognized as equal to men. Rand’s depiction of her heroines’ enjoyment of sex and their freedom from conventional norms anticipates the sexual liberation movement by at least 30 years. Rand was also a champion of women’s reproductive freedom to choose. Her relationship to the feminist movement however was complex. While she praised Freidan’s “The Feminist Mystique”, mainstream feminist’s emphasis on collectivism and on labeling women as victims led her to reject feminism. One criticism of Rand takes aim at her individualistic ethics which rejects any special government help for women or discrimination against men. Another critique says that Rand has internalized a masculine conception of human nature, which explains her view that the essence of femininity is hero worship for masculinity, even though women are equal to men and the ideal relationship is between moral and intellectual equals.

Rand holds that our actions need guidance by a vision of the fundamental nature of the universe and of the efficacy of human thought and activity. The chief function of art is to meet this psychological need by expressing abstract conceptual values and metaphysical truths in concrete perceptible form. Both the artist’s creative work and the audience’s emotional response to it are driven by their senses of life. While art can convey information or advocate a position, she believes that they are secondary to the task of providing an object whose contemplation brings spiritual fulfillment.

### Schopenhauer, Arthur

Schopenhauer’s PHD dissertation examines the assumption that the universe is a thoroughly understandable place. It critically examines the disposition that what is real is what is rational, a disposition shown in Leibniz’s principle of sufficient reason, which is that which requires us to acknowledge that there is no fact or truth that lacks a sufficient reason why it should be so, and not otherwise.

### Spencer, Herbert

Herbert Spencer’s most significant impact has been in sociology, which is derived from his axioms undergirding his “Synthetic Philosophy”. According to Spencer in “First Principles”, three principles regulate the universe, the law of the persistence of force, the law of the instability of the homogenous, and the law of the multiplicity of effects. Though originally homogenous, the universe is gradually becoming increasingly heterogeneous because force or energy expands non-uniformly. Homogeneity is unstable because force is unstable and variable. And, because of the third law, heterogenous consequences grow exponentially, accelerating things becoming heterogenous. Spencer suggested that “Evolution is definable as a change from an incoherent homogeneity to a coherent heterogeneity, accompanying the dissipation of motion and integration of matter.” This applies to human societies, which are also becoming increasingly interdependent and their components more specialized and individuated.

According to Spencer, social evolution unfolds through 4 universal stages: primitive societies characterized by casual political cooperation, militant societies characterized by rigid, hierarchical control, industrial societies where centralized political hegemony collapses, giving way to minimally regulated markets, and spontaneously, self-regulating market utopias in which government withers away. The more crowded primal societies become, the more externally violent and militant they become, and more militant societies destroy less militant ones. As domination occurs, such societies tend to stabilize and to compound and re-compound, stimulating the division of labor and commerce. This transforms successful and established militant societies into negatively regulative industrial societies prizing individual freedom and basic rights. Those which prize said values most will outcompete other societies, and thus where will eventually be an equilibrium that is ever-expanding. However, equilibrium is always unstable, risking dissolution and regression, and Spencer at the end of his life was less optimistic about industrial societies avoiding war. Spencer argued that evolution by natural selection declines in significance compared to use-inheritance as human mental and moral capacities develop.

Spencer was a utilitarian who heavily used evolutionary theory to explain how our liberal utilitarian sense of justice emerges. He took distributive justice seriously, and held that liberty and justice were equivalent. Justice was equated with equal liberty, which holds that the liberty of each, limited by the like liberty of all, is the rule in conformity with which society must be organized. Pleasure-producing activity has tended to generate biologically inheritable associations between certain types of actions, pleasurable feelings and feelings of approval. Social evolution favors cultures that internalize utilitarian maxims intuitively. General utility thrives best where individuals exercise and develop their faculties within the parameters stipulated by equal freedom. Moral rights according to Spencer stipulate our most essential sources of happiness, namely life and liberty, and emerge as institutions in themselves. Though Spencer sometimes labels moral rights as “natural” rights, he means this insofar as he argued that basic rights are natural in the sense of naturally arising as a way of ameliorating social friction. He argues that robust moral rights best foster general happiness as individuals succeed in making themselves happiest when they develop their mental and physical faculties by exercising them as they deem most appropriate, which requires extensive freedom. While Mill and Spencer agreed on a lot, Spencer ascribed a greater stringency to moral rights, while Mill believed that none of these principles were necessary nor their practical conclusions able to be universalized.

Spencer referred to his own brand of utilitarianism as “rational” utilitarianism, which he regarded as superior to Bentham's “empirical” utilitarianism. In this, he distanced himself from social darwinism. Although he believed that ethics can be evolutionarily explained, ethics nevertheless preempts normal struggle for existence with the arrival of humans. Humans invest evolution with an ethical check, making human evolution qualitatively different from non-human evolution. We self-consciously invest our utilitarianism with stringent liberal principles in order to advance our well-being as never before. Spencer holds that our common sense moral judgments derive their intuitive force from their proven utility-promoting power inherited from one generation to the next. Contrary to what empirical utilitarians like Bentham claimed, we never make utilitarian calculations in an intuition-free vacuum. The emergence of utilitarian practical reasoning begins wherever our moral intuitions break down. Empirical utilitarianism is unconsciously made out of intuition, eventually giving way to rational utilitarianism. Although Spencer and Sidgwick had similarities in their views of evolutionary utilitarianism, they parted company in two respects. First, Spencer held that rational utilitarianism converges on indefeasible moral rights, while for Sidgwick systematization never ceases and instead is a continuous process of understanding our social circumstances. Second, Spencer was a Lamarckian while Sidgwick was not. For Spencer, moral faculty is biological and not just culturally inheritable, which results in cultures being favored which have become more rational utilitarian.

Spencer was less a social darwinist and a libertarian as some have made him out to be. He makes a distinction between “rights properly so-called” and political rights, where the former are authentic specifications of equal freedom while the latter are not. Political rights ensure that government remains mostly benign, with said rights including the right to ignore the state and the right of universal suffrage. The former right allows people to relinquish the state’s protection and to refuse paying for its support when the government doesn’t protect proper moral rights. However, Spencer eventually repudiated this political right, as because citizens cannot avoid benefitting by the social order the government maintains, they have no right to opt out from its protection. Early, he regarded universal suffrage as an effective means of preventing government from overreaching its duty, but later concluded that universal suffrage threatened respect for moral rights more than it protected them, especially when extended to women as it encouraged over-legislation. Similarly, over time Spencer eventually became against land nationalization. These signaled abandonments to some extent in rational utilitarianism and more invocations of empirical utilitarianism. Still, he regarded moral rights as indefeasible.
For Mill, utility comes before rights, while for Spencer, rights come before utility, in spite of how insistently Spencer feigns loyalty to the latter.
