---
layout: page
title: Race
permalink: /race/
---

## The Ethics of Investigating Race and Racial Differences

There is an extremely large taboo against looking at issues surrounding race from a biological perspective. A recent study by researchers investigating the comparative taboo of various topics found that the issue of a genetic relationship between race and intelligence was a more taboo topic than issues such as incest and pedophilia<ref>Pesta, B., Kirkegaard, E. O. W., & Bronski, J. (2024). Is research on the genetics of race / IQ gaps “Mythically taboo?” OpenPsych. https://doi.org/10.26775/op.2024.04.15</ref>. Much of the strong aversion exhibited by many regarding this topic comes from the fear that such investigation will ultimately lead to a legitimization of racial prejudice, or claims that one group is superior to another. Admittedly, dividing people into races and implying that they may have differing characteristics is oftentimes a necessary condition by which oppression or claims of superiority can occur. However, that does not mean that suggesting that groups exist and have differing characteristics ultimately legitimates said thing. There are numerous examples in the context of people's everyday lives in which acknowledging differences does not lead or legitimate oppression or claims of superiority:

*Individuals differ from one another on a variety of physical and psychological metrics. In many cases these are heritable, and so there exist people who are genetically stronger, fitter, more sociable, more industrious, and more intelligent than others. And yet we do not see people judging one another on those bases, nor do we see people claim that they are superior to others. Even if you take two individuals who are identical in every way, except that one is significantly more intelligent than the other, no one would make a judgment that one of the two people is superior to the other, or that the other person should be oppressed in some way.

*Families also differ from one another on a variety of physical and psychological metrics. Moreover, within our society we have went even further and view it as acceptable to have biases in favor of our own family. Family gatherings, which exist solely on the basis of a crude ethnocentrism and attraction to genetic similarity are an extremely common and normalized behavior within modern societies. And yet we do not see in spite of this any claims that either some families are superior to other families, nor do we see families justify oppressing other families. We see the existence of families and even the natural ingroup preference of families as normal and acceptable, and not something which inevitably leads to division and oppression.

*These two dimensions of human existence provide an amazing heuristic for analyzing racial dynamics. Whenever one is asking the ethics of a certain proposition, one should always examine whether it would be justifiable on an individual or familial level. If it is not justifiable on either basis, it is probably unjust. If it is on either or both bases, it at least may be justifiable.

But this only suggests that the investigation of races and racial differences does not necessarily lead to oppression and claims of superiority. It says nothing about the positive benefits. There are a number of positive benefits which could be derived from investigating groups and group differences:

*Some see the discovery of truth as something inherently valuable due to the satisfaction associated with its attainment, so there could be some value derived simply from finding answers.

*Understanding racial groups and differences between races can help us better understand the nature of genetics. Seeing the origins of racial differences which may be genetic can have spillover effects into other areas of population genetics, whether it be on an individual or sex-based level in humans, or looking at the origins of traits of non-human organisms.

*It can increase empathy for others. Schneider et al. (2018) found that genetic attributions of behavior were associated with higher and not lower levels of tolerance of vulnerable populations and were not associated with unseemly racial attitudes<ref>Schneider, S. P., Smith, K. B., & Hibbing, J. R. (2018). Genetic attributions: sign of intolerance or acceptance? The Journal of Politics, 80(3), 1023–1027. https://doi.org/10.1086/696860</ref>. Seeing people's behavior as mechanistic can help us increase our empathy for others as it makes behaviors appear less based on agency and more unintentional at worst.

*It can undermine historically harmful oppression narratives, decreasing division. Historically, much of the basis for antisemitism was the attribution of Jewish success in various societies to immoral behaviors of Jews. A genetic attribution for Jewish success may actually decrease some of the resentment that has festered in many societies, because it may imply that Jews being disproportionately successful is natural as opposed to being caused by immoral behavior on the part of Jews.

None of this should be used as a case to lie about pieces of information should they appear to make people feel good. That being said, these arguments demonstrate that the acknowledgement of groups and group differences does not have to be something to legitimate oppression and racial superiority claims, and in many cases can be the exact opposite.

## Classifying Racial Groups

The first issue which should be examined is the question of the degree to which racial classifications are themselves legitimate. The first objection academics often give to those studying group differences is that racial groups are simply arbitrary, and thus that it is useless to study race as a category. Oftentimes, this is done with an appeal to a supposed academic consensus amongst those who study race, who universally tend to reject race as a biological category. Race is said to be a social construct, and human population differentiation is said to exist amongst a gradient as opposed to discrete categories.

Oftentimes, an academic consensus on an issue can be a strong indicator of the truth of a claim. In the absence of further information, it is generally reasonable to defer to academic opinion on an issue. The question one could ask however, is which academics do we defer to? As is suggested by Lieberman et al. (2004), one can get vew different views on whether race is a legitimate category depending on which part of the world they get their academics from<ref>Lieberman, L., Kaszycka, K. A., Fuentes, A. J. M., Yablonsky, L., Kirk, R. C., Strkalj, G., Wang, Q., & Sun, L. (2004). The race concept in six regions: variation without consensus. PubMed, 28(2), 907–921. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15666627</ref>. In the United States and Canada, anthropologists generally reject the concept of race. But in Europe, rejection rates are moderate, in Poland and Cuba they are sizable, and they are lowest in Russia and China. Depending on which region of the world one takes academics from, they can come with a very different view of the issue, and based on this international analysis, there is no real consensus on the issue. Now, maybe since 2004 there has been a stronger consensus within even places such as Russia and China. One would need to provide evidence that this is the case, but this is why we can look at the evidence itself and come to our own conclusions.

*It should firstly be said that just because a dimension can exist on a gradient, it does not imply that therefore we cannot label different parts of the gradient within the dimension. For example, color exists on a gradient, and yet there is still use in distinguishing between various colors, such as green and blue. Race may be socially constructed, as does color, but that does not mean that it is impossible to derive use from race as a category.

*But race is not in fact a gradient. Genetic clustering analysis finds that not only do human genetic clusters exist, but that they correspond strongly to predefined regional or population groups or to collections of geographically and linguistically similar populations. Predefined labels of ancestry are very informative about membership in genetic clusters, even for intermediate populations<ref>Rosenberg, N. A., Pritchard, J. K., Weber, J. L., Cann, H. M., Kidd, K. K., Zhivotovsky, L. A., & Feldman, M. W. (2002). Genetic structure of human populations. Science, 298(5602), 2381–2385. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1078311</ref>. Self-reported ancestry in fact almost perfectly corresponds to genetic cluster membership<ref>Tang, H., Quertermous, T., Rodriguez, B., Kardia, S. L., Zhu, X., Brown, A., Pankow, J. S., Province, M. A., Hunt, S. C., Boerwinkle, E., Schork, N. J., & Risch, N. J. (2005). Genetic structure, Self-Identified Race/Ethnicity, and confounding in Case-Control association studies. American Journal of Human Genetics, 76(2), 268–275. https://doi.org/10.1086/427888</ref>.

*When looking at a single loci of an individual, there is a relatively high probability of misclassifying the person's race. However, this drops to zero when looking at a sufficiently large number of loci<ref>Edwards, A. (2003). Human genetic diversity: Lewontin’s fallacy. BioEssays, 25(8), 798–801. https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.10315</ref>. There may be more variation within than between groups, but that does not mean that it is impossible to distinguish between members of differing groups.

*Some critique genetic cluster analysis because it can be difficult to ascertain exactly how many clusters you should have. You can always infinitely divide between groups, and so they argue that there is no reason to prefer two racial groups to ten. It is true that there is some level of arbitrariness to how many groups you define. But this is an issue within biology more broadly. For example, looking at wikipedia, there are numerous subspecies of brown bear that exist in North America<ref>Wikipedia contributors. (2024, July 13). Subspecies of brown bear. Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subspecies_of_brown_bear</ref>. One could easily argue that there is no reason why scientists defined eight subspecies, or just four, or just one. In fact, the article itself describes how there is disagreement amongst scientists as to whether certain groups can be classified as subspecies in themselves. None of this should however suggest that it is useless to make categories between different types of brown bears, even if there is some arbitrariness to it. Studying subspecies can still be useful.

*I do not mean to argue that we should consider races to be different subspecies of humans. There may be some use in doing so, and there may be some use in not doing so. The question of whether it would be useful goes beyond the scope of this article.

All of this suggests that from a biological or population genetics perspective, there is a level of use to using race as a category. It is simple, it corresponds already to most people's folk understandings of race, and it also corresponds to actual genetic differences between populations. There is a second argument against the usage of race as a category in science, and that is the concern that it can be used to legitimate oppression and claims of superiority. This argument was already addressed in a previous section.

Additionally, from a medical perspective, having consistent racial classifications can provide some value. Pharmacogenetics research has very inconsistent race and ethnic classification due to racial definitions differing between various studies. Common taxonomy of geographic ancestry could produce reproducible research and clinical implementation of its results<ref>https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6612983/</ref>. There may be some benefit in using traditional folk categories if they allow for good identification by a doctor or good self-identification of one's ethnic origin, and hence of one's genetic propensities from a medical perspective.

## Implications

It is possible to assert that there are differences between races, including psychological differences, without having the concept of race necessarily be regarded as legitimate. For example, if you took a group of 100 people in a room and randomly assigned 50 to one side of the room, and the other 50 to the other side of the room, it is possible that there would exist mean group differences on a variety of metrics in spite of the complete randomness of the assignment of the groups. But even this is more of an extreme of a race than what race denialists have, because they don't suggest that races don't have differences between one another. Rather, they just suggest that race is a gradient so it's arbitrary to make a cutoff point between two groups in the gradient. In this situation, the dimension upon which the gradient exists would by definition imply a difference between the groups you identify, even if the groups are arbitrary in nature.

### Race and Intelligence

IQ gaps between races, although the specifics have been debated, have generally been identified as existing<ref>Neisser, U., Boodoo, G., Bouchard, T. J., Boykin, A. W., Brody, N., Ceci, S. J., Halpern, D. F., Loehlin, J. C., Perloff, R., Sternberg, R. J., & Urbina, S. (1996). Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns. American Psychologist/the American Psychologist, 51(2), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066x.51.2.77</ref>. The most well-established gap is a 15-point or one standard deviation between African Americans and whites, where whites score higher. Furthermore, cognitive function tests are measurement invariant across groups, meaning that intelligence tests can be used to measure differences in cognition between racial groups<ref>Taylor, R. L., & Ziegler, E. W. (1987). Comparison of the first principal factor on the WISC-R across ethnic groups. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 47(3), 691–694. https://doi.org/10.1177/001316448704700318</ref><ref>Barnes, L. L., Yumoto, F., Capuano, A., Wilson, R. S., Bennett, D. A., & Tractenberg, R. E. (2015). Examination of the Factor Structure of a Global Cognitive Function Battery across Race and Time. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 22(1), 66–75. https://doi.org/10.1017/s1355617715001113
</ref><ref>Kaufman, A. S., Kaufman, J. C., & McLean, J. E. (1995). Factor structure of the Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test (KAIT) for Whites, African Americans, and Hispanics. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 55(3), 365–376. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013164495055003001</ref>. Test bias does not explain these gaps. The black-white IQ gap is larger on "non-cultural" test items compared to "cultural" test items because non-cultural items require more sheer reasoning ability<ref>Jensen, A. R., & McGurk, F. C. (1987). Black-white bias in ‘cultural’ and ‘noncultural’ test items. Personality and Individual Differences, 8(3), 295–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/0191-8869(87)90029-8</ref>. The primary aspect of the debate surrounding race and intelligence concerns not the measured intelligence differences between various groups, but rather the cause for the differences.

It should be noted that the most recent polling that I am aware of suggests that only 16% of experts on intelligence believe in a 100% environmental explanation for the black-white difference in IQ<ref>Rindermann, H., Becker, D., & Coyle, T. R. (2020). Survey of expert opinion on intelligence: Intelligence research, experts’ background, controversial issues, and the media. Intelligence, 78, 101406. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2019.101406</ref>. This should strongly imply from the outset that an explanation for the gaps which involves genetics is potentially plausible, given the expert opinion on the issue. I believe that the cause for racial differences in intelligence is a mix of genetics and environment. It may be possible to quantify the relative influence of both, but I do not have sufficient knowledge in order to do it myself. I simply suggest that the preponderance of evidence suggests that both genes and environment play a role.

#### Why a Partial Genetic Perspective is Possible

The cultural loading that we are subjected to within modern societies primes people to be less sympathetic to genetic explanations for psychological differences between groups. From a pure evolutionary perspective, any two populations which are isolated from one another or reproduce independently from one another for a sufficiently long period of time will develop significant differences, some of which will be cognitive. 

Chimpanzees and gorillas have different cognitive abilities, in spite of them being in identical environments in some cases, due to them having different sexual selective patterns and/or different natural selective pressures. Certainly, this took a longer time than it did for racial groups to differentiate from one another. Humans started travelling out of Africa about 70,000 to 50,000 years ago<ref>Global Human Journey. (n.d.). https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/global-human-journey/</ref>, which is much shorter than the millions of years of separation chimpanzees had from gorillas.

Map of the Global Human Journey<ref>Global Human Journey. (n.d.). https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/global-human-journey/</ref>.

We can examine however recent evolution of Homo Sapiens. Evidence suggests that much of the evolution of homo sapiens into the species that it is today took place over the past one million years Homo evolutionary timeline<ref>Handwerk, B. (2021, September 15). An evolutionary timeline of Homo Sapiens. Smithsonian Magazine. https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/essential-timeline-understanding-evolution-homo-sapiens-180976807/</ref>. We can take this as a rough proxy for how long it may take for large intelligence differences to emerge between groups assuming normal evolution patterns, as the predecessor to Homo Sapiens must have evolved our traits over that period of time, including our significantly higher cognitive ability relative to predecessors such as Homo Heidelbergensis.

The question then arises, were the patterns of human evolution which emerged over the past 70,000-50,000 years normal? There is research suggesting that since 40,000 years ago, human evolution has been speeding up, and has become 100 times faster in the past 5000 years alone<ref>Gibbons, A. (2007, December 10). Human Evolution Is Speeding Up: New study says that 7% of human genes are evolving rapidly. Science. https://www.science.org/content/article/human-evolution-speeding</ref>. Looking solely at the evolution that has occurred over the past 5000 years, this would be equivalent to evolution occurring at a normal speed of 500,000 years. Not as much as the million year estimate for species-differentiating intelligence changes to occur, but still intuitively enough for some intelligence differences to emerge between populations.

#### Evidence for a Partial Genetic Perspective

So if it is possible or plausible that there exist genetic racial IQ gaps, what might be the mechanism surrounding it? Evolution generally occurs because different organisms exist in different environments and are thus subject to differing evolutionary pressures. These pressures can affect physical or psychological traits of an individual. One hypothesis is the "Cold Winters Theory", which posits that people in colder temperatures are more likely to evolve higher intelligence over time due to the pressures it puts on those people for innovativeness in harsh climates. IQ has in fact been found to be related to climatic variables in African and Eurasian countries<ref>Templer, D. I., & Stephens, J. S. (2014). The relationship between IQ and climatic variables in African and Eurasian countries. Intelligence, 46, 169–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2014.06.001</ref>. The evolved threefold increase in the size of the hominid brain since Homo Habilis has been identified to be a product of factors, with paleoclimatic variation being one of the factors involved<ref>Bailey, D. H., & Geary, D. C. (2009). Hominid brain evolution. Human Nature, 20(1), 67–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-008-9054-0</ref>. The cranial capacities of hominid skulls in fact are highly correlated with paleoclimatic changes in temperature<ref>Ash, J., & Gallup, G. G. (2007). Paleoclimatic Variation and Brain Expansion during Human Evolution. Human Nature, 18(2), 109–124. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-007-9015-z</ref>.

It should be noted that head size is correlated with IQ<ref>Pietschnig, J., Penke, L., Wicherts, J. M., Zeiler, M., & Voracek, M. (2015). Meta-analysis of associations between human brain volume and intelligence differences: How strong are they and what do they mean? Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews/Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 57, 411–432. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.09.017</ref>, and white and black children matched on IQ show no difference in mean head size<ref>Jensen, A. R., & Johnson, F. W. (1994). Race and sex differences in head size and IQ. Intelligence, 18(3), 309–333. https://doi.org/10.1016/0160-2896(94)90032-9</ref>. Asians generally have the highest cranial capacity, followed by Europeans, and then Africans<ref>Rushton, J., & Rushton, E. W. (2003). Brain size, IQ, and racial-group differences. Intelligence, 31(2), 139–155. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0160-2896(02)00137-x</ref><ref>Rushton, J. P., Ankney, C. D., & University of Western Ontario. (1996). Brain size and cognitive ability: Correlations with age, sex, social class, and race. In Psychonomic Bulletin & Review (Vols. 1–1, pp. 21–36). Psychonomic Society, Inc. https://philipperushton.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Brain-Size-and-Cognitive-Ability-Correlations-with-Age-Sex-Social-Class-and-Race-1996-by-John-Philippe-Rushton-C.-Davison-Ankney.pdf</ref>.

Additionally, the differences in head size and hence by proxy IQ have been identified to be at least 10,000 years old, long before any factors of racism would play a role<ref>Lynn, R. (2010). Consistency of race differences in intelligence over millennia: A comment on Wicherts, Borsboom and Dolan. Personality and Individual Differences, 48(2), 100–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2009.09.007</ref> (although that is getting ahead). So therefore, there is an identified mechanism through which racial differences in intelligence could emerge, and it is consistent with observations in reality. Blacks and whites evolved in different climates, the colder climates whites evolved in selected for higher intelligence, and these result in existing head size and intelligence differences we observe in reality today.

Sidenote, there is a distinction between craniometry, the measurement of head size, and phrenology, which looks at scalp morphology. The discussion here is employing only craniometry, and not phrenology which has been identified to be a pseudoscience<ref>Jones, O. P., Alfaro-Almagro, F., & Jbabdi, S. (2018). An empirical, 21st century evaluation of phrenology. Cortex, 106, 26–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2018.04.011</ref>.

Another line of evidence that strongly implies that racial differences in intelligence exist is the issue of genetic variation between populations. There have been numerous studies which look at whether genes related to IQ vary across populations. Davide Piffer has done several studies on this. In a 2015 study he found that alleles exhibiting significant and replicable positive associations with IQ are strongly correlated with country-level IQ. Allele frequencies varied by continents in a way corresponding to population differences in intelligence<ref>Piffer, D. (2015). A review of intelligence GWAS hits: Their relationship to country IQ and the issue of spatial autocorrelation. Intelligence, 53, 43–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2015.08.008</ref>. Additionally, in a 2019 study he found that polygenic scores for educational attainment and intelligence were found to correlate with population differences in IQ, with Asian populations at the highest, followed by Europeans, followed by Africans<ref>Evidence for Recent Polygenic Selection on Educational Attainment and Intelligence Inferred from Gwas Hits: A Replication of Previous Findings Using Recent Data. (n.d.). ResearchGate. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/332076417_Evidence_for_Recent_Polygenic_Selection_on_Educational_Attainment_and_Intelligence_Inferred_from_Gwas_Hits_A_Replication_of_Previous_Findings_Using_Recent_Data</ref>. Research by Curtis Dunkel and his colleagues investigated the Jewish advantage in intelligence compared to Catholics and Lutherans and found that it was significantly mediated by group differences in a polygenic score for educational attainment, cognitive ability, and self-rated mathematical ability<ref>Polygenic scores mediate the Jewish phenotypic advantage in educational attainment and cognitive ability compared with Catholics and Lutherans. (n.d.). ResearchGate. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330601752_Polygenic_Scores_Mediate_the_Jewish_Phenotypic_Advantage_in_Educational_Attainment_and_Cognitive_Ability_Compared_With_Catholics_and_Lutherans</ref>. Further research from Shi and colleagues found that many of the amino acid polymorphic sites from the brain size regulating gene CASC5 have high frequencies of derived alleles in East Asians, but are rare in Europeans and Africans. This suggests that there was natural selection that tended to favor a larger gray matter volume in East Asians<ref>Shi, L., Hu, E., Wang, Z., Liu, J., Li, J., Li, M., Chen, H., Yu, C., Jiang, T., & Su, B. (2016). Regional selection of the brain size regulating gene CASC5 provides new insight into human brain evolution. Human Genetics, 136(2), 193–204. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-016-1748-5</ref>. Additionally, this type of polygenic score research can be used to predict intelligence in other populations than where the polygenic score data was derived from. European polygenic scores for example predict mean IQs of Chinese provinces for instance<ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/384250199_Predictive_Accuracy_of_Polygenic_Scores_from_European_GWAS_among_Chinese_Provinces</ref>.

There have been critiques of this line of research which it would be dishonest to ignore, but they are unconvincing at best. Freese and colleagues point out that in Dunkel's study, the polygenic score differences would lead one to significantly overestimate the disparity in IQ that exists in reality, suggesting that one should be careful when interpreting group polygenic score differences<ref>Problems with a Causal Interpretation of Polygenic Score Differences between Jewish and non-Jewish Respondents in the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study. (n.d.). ResearchGate. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334385807_Problems_with_a_Causal_Interpretation_of_Polygenic_Score_Differences_between_Jewish_and_non-Jewish_Respondents_in_the_Wisconsin_Longitudinal_Study</ref>. The use of polygenic scores has also been criticized on the basis that they can often make predictions between groups that don’t fare in reality<ref>Rosenberg, N. A., Edge, M. D., Pritchard, J. K., & Feldman, M. W. (2018). Interpreting polygenic scores, polygenic adaptation, and human phenotypic differences. Evolution, Medicine and Public Health, 2019(1), 26–34. https://doi.org/10.1093/emph/eoy036</ref>. For example, polygenic score differences would predict that West Africans are much shorter than Europeans, when this isn’t the case<ref>Problems with a Causal Interpretation of Polygenic Score Differences between Jewish and non-Jewish Respondents in the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study. (n.d.). ResearchGate. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334385807_Problems_with_a_Causal_Interpretation_of_Polygenic_Score_Differences_between_Jewish_and_non-Jewish_Respondents_in_the_Wisconsin_Longitudinal_Study</ref>. This appears to be a very weak criticism, as even if in not every case a polygenic score prediction will perfectly match population distributions of a trait, the fact that the scores match populations distributions in exactly the way a genetic explanation for racial IQ gaps would predict suggests a genetic racial IQ gap exists.

More recently, more sophisticated research utilizing admixture analysis has been conducted to understand how genetic ancestry affects intelligence. Looking at Hispanic and Latino adults, Xia et al. (2024) finds that several genes associated with European ancestry tended to predict higher intelligence in Hispanics, while several genes associated with Amerindian and African ancestry tended to predict lower intelligence<ref>https://alz-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/alz.14082</ref>.

A final line of evidence concerns MRI scans. MRI analysis indicates significant brain differences between groups of people, and various forms of imaging and geometric data on brains can predict a person's genetic ancestry at a very high performance<ref>Rao, N. P., Jeelani, H., Achalia, R., Achalia, G., Jacob, A., Bharath, R. D., Varambally, S., Venkatasubramanian, G., & Yalavarthy, P. K. (2017). Population differences in brain morphology: Need for population specific brain template. Psychiatry Research. Neuroimaging, 265, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscychresns.2017.03.018</ref><ref>Altmann, A., Mourao-Miranda, J., Centre for Medical Image Computing, University College London, & Max Planck University College London Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research. (2018). EVIDENCE FOR BIAS OF GENETIC ANCESTRY IN RESTING STATE FUNCTIONAL MRI. In bioRxiv [Journal-article]. https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/440776v1.full.pdf</ref><ref>Fan, C. C., Bartsch, H., Schork, A. J., Chen, C., Wang, Y., Lo, M., Brown, T. T., Kuperman, J. M., Hagler, D. J., Schork, N. J., Jernigan, T. L., & Dale, A. M. (2015). Modeling the 3D Geometry of the Cortical Surface with Genetic Ancestry. CB/Current Biology, 25(15), 1988–1992. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.06.006</ref>. This by itself does not imply that there exists genetic differences in intelligence between racial groups, but it does strongly imply that there are general brain differences which biologically differ between groups. Any environmental explanation for the high predictive power of brain imaging seems rather dubious from the outset. Kirkegaard and Fuerst found that when applying a multimodal MRI-based predictor of intelligence, race can confound models when a multiracial training sample is used because models learn to predict race and use race to predict intelligence<ref>A multimodal MRI-based predictor of intelligence and its relation to Race/Ethnicity. (n.d.). ResearchGate. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/369479241_A_Multimodal_MRI-based_Predictor_of_Intelligence_and_Its_Relation_to_RaceEthnicity</ref>. So models developed to try and predict intelligence use race to predict a person's intelligence when given MRI data. This strongly implies that race qua race is a factor which drives intelligence differences between people.

#### Absence of Evidence for a Full Environmental Perspective

So all of the aforementioned information taken together strongly suggests that one cannot explain racial intelligence differences without taking into account genetics. We can also look at it from the other angle. If we rule out reasonable environmental explanations for racial IQ gaps, it follows that genetics is a reasonable explanation for at least part of the gaps. Several factors are examined here:

***Socioeconomics -** When socioeconomic status is controlled for, black-white gaps in intelligence do not go away<ref>Neisser, U., Boodoo, G., Bouchard, T. J., Boykin, A. W., Brody, N., Ceci, S. J., Halpern, D. F., Loehlin, J. C., Perloff, R., Sternberg, R. J., & Urbina, S. (1996). Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns. American Psychologist/the American Psychologist, 51(2), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066x.51.2.77</ref>. Most discrimination, past or present that blacks may face relative to whites would likely strongly predict a low socioeconomic status, so we can use SES as a predictor of potential discrimination or injustice. Blacks matched on socioeconomic status to whites still have a lower IQ. However, it is arguably fallacious to even do this, as there is a chicken and egg problem with looking at socioeconomic status. Sure, a low socioeconomic status can cause a lower IQ, so this can explain IQ gaps between groups, but a lower IQ also causes a lower socioeconomic status. Blacks may have a lower socioeconomic status in part of in whole because of their genetically lower IQ, and controlling for their socioeconomic status erases this genetic effect. To control for socioeconomic status would thus be to control for genetics itself, the very factor we are trying to isolate away in the controls. This issue is commonly known as the "sociologist's fallacy".

***Racism -** Racism is often used to explain disparities in intelligence. It's extremely nebulous and hence can always be reformed to make the hypothesis that race gaps in IQ are due to discrimination nearly unfalsifiable. Nonetheless, some research has been done on this. In order for one to suggest that racial gaps in intelligence are caused by racism, one would have to firstly demonstrate a negative correlation between racism one experiences and their intelligence level. But evidence suggests that a negative correlation does not exist. In fact in the United States, the black-white IQ gap tends to be smaller in counties with more republicans, more white people, and higher implicit anti-black racism<ref>Systemic racism does not explain variation in race gaps on cognitive tests. (n.d.). ResearchGate. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/377204444_Systemic_Racism_Does_Not_Explain_Variation_in_Race_Gaps_on_Cognitive_Tests</ref>. This suggests that in the places with the lowest levels of racism, there are higher IQ gaps between blacks and whites, and so controlling for whatever disproportionate level of racism blacks face would make the environmentalist argument more difficult to sustain. They would have to explain a larger gap.

**Sidenote:** The fact that places with less racism have higher racial IQ gaps suggests that the publicization of information about genetic IQ gaps between groups would not lead to a perpetuation of such gaps through increased discrimination. This article has already argued that acknowledging such gaps publicly would likely not lead to increased discrimination, and may even reduce tension between people, but even if it increased it this would not perpetuate gaps.

***Stereotype Threat -** A subset of the racism argument is the notion of stereotype threat. It is the notion that gaps in intelligence may be due to certain groups perceiving themselves as less academically gifted which will reflect in poor intelligence test performance. This firstly would likely contradict evidence presented beforehand that cognitive function tests are measurement invariant across groups, unless this stereotype threat was equally ubiquitous across all domains relating to cognitive ability as opposed to just IQ tests. This seems from the outset to be a highly dubious assumption, but evidence on stereotype threat directly does not suggest that it is a significant factor explaining group intelligence gaps. There exists strong publication bias in the stereotype threat literature which suggests that the effect of stereotype threat may simply be null<ref>Zigerell, L. J. (2017). Potential publication bias in the stereotype threat literature: Comment on Nguyen and Ryan (2008). Journal of Applied Psychology, 102(8), 1159–1168. https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000188</ref>.

***Infectious Disease -** Exposure to infectious disease has been shown to be a strong predictor of IQ across both American states and across countries internationally<ref>Eppig, C. (2024, February 20). Why is average IQ higher in some places? Scientific American. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/why-is-average-iq-higher-in-some-places/</ref>. This may be a partial predictor, but no evidence has been presented to suggest that it entirely explains the gap, especially when this exposure would likely be strongly correlated with socioeconomic status which controlling for does not eliminate the black-white IQ gap.

***The Closing of the Gap -** There is some evidence that the black-white IQ gap may have closed a few points in recent decades<ref>https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3146648#:~:text=I%20review%20the%20evidence%20on,so%20due%20to%20methodological%20flaws</ref>. However, even with this closing the IQ gap is still substantial and it is not clear to what degree the narrowing was g-loaded.

The bottom line is that environmental explanations certainly account for a portion of racial gaps in intelligence, but there has been no strong evidence to suggest that they entirely explain the gaps. That is why this article promotes a mixed genetics-environment explanation for group differences in cognitive ability.

#### Approximating the Gene-Environment Influences

I have not done extensive research on the degree to which racial IQ gaps are genetic or environment. The evidence presented above strongly implies a dual role, but says little about the relative influences. Nonetheless I have devised a rough method by which one can quantify the gene-environment influences, utilizing heritability estimates from research.

Overall, most research suggests that intelligence is overall about 60-80% heritable (see psychology page). We can say that this is a pooled estimate for the heritability of intelligence, including people of all races. This means that population genetic variation explains 60-80% of the variation in trait intelligence. We can call this "relevant genetic variation". At the same time, the heritability estimate suggests that population environmental variation explains 20-40% of the variation in trait intelligence. We can call this "relevant environmental variation". We can compare this pooled heritability estimate to the heritability estimates of individual ethnic groups, or "group heritability estimates".

If it is the case that racial intelligence gaps were 100% environmental, that would mean that the relevant genetic variation would be identical in pooled samples as in individual group samples. Meanwhile, the pooled sample would have a higher relevant environmental variation than the individual group samples as it would include groups with different intelligence scores which are different entirely due to environment. Thus, moving from a pooled sample to a group sample, we would expect the heritability to be higher as the relevant environmental variation would decrease, meaning the relevant genetic variation would play a higher role. Conversely, if the gap was mostly genetic, we would expect the heritability to decrease as the effect of the reduction in relevant genetic variation moving from a pooled to group sample would exceed the effect of the reduction in relevant environmental variation. If group IQ differences are as much genetic and environmental as individual differences are, we would expect the heritability to be the same, as the reductions in the relevant environmental and genetic variations would cancel each other out when moving from pooled to group sampling. 

Research suggests that there exists no ethnic differences in the heritability of intelligence<ref>https://sci-hub.se/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2019.101408</ref>, and that the heritability of intelligence among both blacks and whites is about 0.6. This is within the range of the pooled heritability of intelligence, if not slightly lower. Therefore, I conclude that the black-white IQ gap, and likely other racial IQ gaps, are caused by as much a mix of genetics and environment as individual differences in intelligence. That is, the gap is 60-80% genetic and 20-40% environmental.

#### Implications

Group IQ differences can help in part explain differences in wealth across countries. There is a positive correlation between national IQ score and innovation<ref>https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/76922/</ref>. Nations with higher average intelligence are more liberal (greater highest marginal individual tax rate and thus lower economic inequality), are less religious, and are more monogamous. Average intelligence appears to be the strongest predictor of these traits<ref>https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-biosocial-science/article/abs/iq-and-the-values-of-nations/B28886FC682668151084DF2E9DC5C0AF</ref>.

### Other Psychological Racial Differences

There have been other psychological differences between races which have been identified. The full discussion about how these are plausible will not be here, as it was already addressed in the race and intelligence section. It was already demonstrated how there are significant differences between races in brain structure, which are likely heavily mediated by genetics, and hence intuitively many psychological differences would be in part genetic:

***Novelty-Seeking -** Research suggests there exists a positive correlation between novelty-seeking DRD4 polymorphisms and human migration distance out of Africa<ref>Matthews, L. J., & Butler, P. M. (2011). Novelty‐seeking DRD4 polymorphisms are associated with human migration distance out‐of‐Africa after controlling for neutral population gene structure. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 145(3), 382–389. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.21507</ref>. This makes intuitive sense given that those who would travel outside of Africa would likely be those who are open to novel environments and are generally more exploratory. This may mean that there exists genetic racial differences in personality traits relating to openness to experience.

***Individualism/Collectivism Orientation -** There exist various genetic markers of social sensitivity which reflect the degree of emotional responsivity to social events and experiences. There exists a robust cross-national correlation between the frequency of variants in these genes and their collectivism and also incidence of major depression and anxiety and mood disorders. This implies a genetic contribution to cultural differences, where east Asian cultures tend to be more genetically collectivistic and European cultures tend to be more genetically individualistic<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20592043/</ref><ref>https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2842692/</ref>. Part of the reason why this may have evolutionarily arisen is as an evolutionary response to disease prevalence in various areas. The regional prevalence of pathogens has a strong positive correlation with collectivism<ref>https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/rspb.2008.0094</ref>. This might also provide a genetic explanation for the lower levels of ethnocentrism that white people exhibit today.

***Life History Strategy -** Genes associated with risk acceptance versus prudence and short-term versus long-term time orientation are strongly associated with national measures of life history strategy and time orientation, even after controlling for socioeconomic variables<ref>https://sci-hub.se/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2014.12.014</ref>. Short-term life history strategies were found to exist predominantly in African countries, followed by European countries, followed by East Asian countries. This might help to explain why black children tend to have less delay of gratification than white children<ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00224545.1974.9923126</ref><ref>https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/pubeco/v95y2011i11p1377-1385.html</ref>. Furthermore, research comparing Chinese and European newborns finds that European newborns are more responsive to a researcher putting a cloth over their nose, being more likely to get agitated and try to remove the cloth from their nose<ref>https://sci-hub.ru/10.1038/2241227a0</ref>.

***Aggression -** The 2-repeat allele of the MAOA gene is carried by 0.1% of caucasian males and 5.2% of African-American males. African-American males who carried the 2-repeat allele are significantly more likely to be arrested and incarcerated, are more anti-social, and have higher involvement in violent behaviors over the life course<ref>https://lesacreduprintemps19.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/exploring-the-association-between-the-2-repeat-allele-of-the-maoa-gene.pdf</ref>. A similar analysis could not be done for caucasians due to its rarity amongst caucasians.

## Understanding Race as a Social Phenomenon

It is difficult to dispute the notion that race is a major social issue within modern societies. Investigating the reasons for why race is generally seen as being significant to many people is essential to helping alleviate conflict.

### Ethnocentrism: Descriptively and Ethically

Human morality fundamentally derives from concentric circles of obligation that one has to individuals who are gradually less and less related to oneself. This is because people are interested in passing down their genes and yet need the assistance of others to survive. Even when an individual does not survive, if someone genetically related to them survives, that is still in part a passage of one's genes. Thus, humans will naturally feel a greater sense of obligation towards those that they are genetically similar to. This can be seen with nepotism, and preference for one's family; followed by preference for friends, community, and race/ethnicity, followed by a general preference for humanity. One can even extend this back to different animals. Humans feel less bad about killing an ant compared to a rabbit, in part because the rabbit appears more genetically similar.

These concentric circles of obligation explain why some degree of ethnocentrism appears to have arisen through evolution. It will naturally dominate over pure selfish strategies because it doesn't induce sufficient cooperation, and it will naturally dominate over pure humanitarian strategies because those with ingroup preferences will free ride over those without such preferences<ref>https://www.jasss.org/16/3/7.html</ref>.

The normality of ingroup bias can help to explain why high in-group bias is positively related to self-esteem<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1207/S15327957PSPR0402_04</ref>, and that across racial groups a sense of ethnic identity is positively associated with well-being<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0272431699019003001</ref><ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0272431600020001003</ref><ref>https://sci-hub.se/https://doi.org/10.1007/s10902-016-9735-z</ref>. Interactions between those of other racial groups is more psychologically difficult for a lot of people, which is why interracial interactions have been found to impair executive functioning<ref>https://groups.psych.northwestern.edu/spcl/documents/depletion_JPSP05.pdf</ref>.

This ingroup bias is likely relatively malleable. For example research suggests that exposure to other races decreases racial prejudice and increases liking for strangers of that race<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16737372/</ref><ref>https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2705986/</ref>, pointing to an environmental influence on ingroup preference. Still, an ingroup preference exists in every racial group. The only group which doesn't have this is white liberals, who have a negative ingroup bias (in other words, an outgroup preference)<ref>https://www.tabletmag.com/sections/news/articles/americas-white-saviors</ref>. But the fact that white people have the lowest level of ingroup bias amongst every racial group might help to explain why white people tend to have lower levels of self-esteem<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12002695/</ref>, as well as worse mental health and higher suicide rates compared to at least most other racial groups<ref>https://www.psychiatry.org/File%20Library/Psychiatrists/Cultural-Competency/Mental-Health-Disparities/Mental-Health-Facts-for-Diverse-Populations.pdf</ref><ref>https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2780380</ref><ref>https://yaleglobalhealthreview.com/2017/05/14/white-male-suicide-the-exception-to-privelege/</ref>. This furthermore might be one factor behind why mixed race people are the most likely of any racial group to report having a mental illness<ref>https://www.psychiatry.org/File%20Library/Psychiatrists/Cultural-Competency/Mental-Health-Disparities/Mental-Health-Facts-for-Diverse-Populations.pdf</ref>, as mixed race people tend not have a coherent or strong racial identity.

In many areas within today's cultural climate there is a large push to suppress a natural ingroup bias. The notion of racism, which will be discussed later, has had its definition infinitely expanded to include an ever larger set of behaviors, including having some degree of ingroup preference (at least when it's whites having the ingroup preference). But experimental psychological research suggests that ingroup favoritism is not necessarily linked with outgroup hostility. Furthermore, ethnocentrism and xenophobia appear to be uncorrelated with one another<ref>https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/323821?journalCode=ca&</ref>.

And this reality can be seen when examining these ingroup biases, in the form of ethnocentrism but also familial, in a number of contexts. Family gatherings and other social events which implicitly prioritize the family are seen as perfectly acceptable. In fact, those who reject such types of ingroup associative behaviors are often pathologized. Furthermore, this familial bias does not produce with it a hatred for those outside the family. Similarly, many individuals, particularly those from nonwhite groups, tend to associate with those of their own ethnicity more often than at random. There exist many race and ethnicity-based associations (mostly for nonwhite groups) which exist in societies and are seen as being perfectly acceptable. Those who engage in such associative behavior likewise do not have a hatred for those outside of their ethnic or racial group.

Nonetheless, there are behaviors which are seen as clearly going too far when it comes to familial bias for instance. Nepotism is generally looked down in social contexts, because it destroys public meritocracy in favor of privileging those who happen to be genetically related. There are clear boundaries where familial ingroup bias can go too far, and similar standards should exist with ethnicity. Police bias in favor of their family members should be seen as bad, as should racial bias in police. Familial bias in hiring should be seen as bad, as should racial bias in hiring. Societies, in order to function as societies with a diverse set of individuals, require some level of throwing away of ingroup biases in public contexts. In private contexts, such as interpersonal gatherings however, such biases should not be frowned upon.

While some may view this as being a particularly radical position, this is in some sense a description of what already occurs in general. People tend to associate with those who are similar to them, and this is merely an argument for that being normal and acceptable.

### Research on the Effects of Ethnic Diversity

Understanding ethnocentrism as relatively natural, this can help to understand why research on ethnic diversity suggests that it can oftentimes have negative effects on society. Several broad themes emerge from examining the effects of ethnic diversity:

*People generally feel a greater sense of community when those around them are of a similar ethnic group. This can have downstream effects on social trust, altruism, conflict, economic growth, health, and poverty.

*This effect can be moderated with more intergroup contact, and contexts where cleavages are less salient, either due to lower economic divides or a sense of need for unification.

*Ethnic diversity also works differently with different people. Those who are higher in openness to experience are less likely to experience negative side effects of diversity.

*Diversity, when it brings about greater levels of experience and ideas generation can have positive effects in terms of innovation.

#### Social Effects: Mixed

The overall research suggests that ethnic diversity has negative effects on social trust, based on results from both meta-analytical and experimental data and also a literature review on the subject. However, this varies according to measure, and the evidence suggests the effect is strongest in the context of within-neighborhood interactions<ref>Glaeser, E. L., Laibson, D. I., Scheinkman, J. A., & Soutter, C. L. (2000). Measuring trust. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 811–812. https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/laibson/files/measuring_trust.pdf</ref><ref>Van Der Meer, T., & Tolsma, J. (2014). Ethnic diversity and its effects on social cohesion. Annual Review of Sociology, 40(1), 459–478. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-071913-043309</ref><ref>Dinesen, P. T., Schaeffer, M., & Sønderskov, K. M. (2020). Ethnic Diversity and Social Trust: A Narrative and Meta-Analytical Review. Annual Review of Political Science, 23(1), 441–465. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-052918-020708</ref>. Conversely, there is a positive relationship between co-ethnic concentration and trust in neighbors<ref>Wu, Z., Hou, F., Schimmele, C., & Carmichael, A. (2017). Co-ethnic concentration and trust in Canada’s urban neighbourhoods. Urban Studies, 55(10), 2159–2178. https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098017708939</ref>. Interestingly, immigrants appear to also adopt levels of social trust consistent with those of native-born citizens, and this effect becomes stronger for second-generation immigrants<ref>Dinesen, P. T., & Hooghe, M. (2010). When in Rome, Do as the Romans Do: The Acculturation of Generalized Trust among Immigrants in Western Europe. In Center for Migration Studies of New York, International Migration Review (Vols. 44–44, Issue Number 3, pp. 697–727). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-7379.2010.00822.x</ref><ref>Helliwell, J. F., Wang, S., & Xu, J. (2015). How Durable are Social Norms? Immigrant Trust and Generosity in 132 Countries. Social Indicators Research, 128(1), 201–219. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-015-1026-2</ref>. This suggests that ethnic diversity in general reduces social cohesion and immigrants also feel these effects. On an individual level, this effect certainly varies from person to person, as research has found that those who move into a diverse place experience no negative effects on social cohesion while those who are in a community which becomes more diverse do have negative social cohesion effects<ref>Does Ethnic Diversity Have a Negative Effect on Attitudes towards the. . .. (2015, November 14). archive.is. https://archive.is/EyRQQ</ref>. This is likely due to selection bias of those moving being more likely to be sympathetic towards diverse communities. Ethnic diversity also erodes social capital<ref>In-migration and dilution of community social capital. (2018). In CES (No. 32; Vol. 18). https://www2.census.gov/ces/wp/2018/CES-WP-18-32.pdf</ref>, including the probability of volunteering, having a group membership, and the probability of entertaining<ref>Costa, D., & Kahn, M. (2001). Understanding the Decline in Social Capital, 1952-1998. https://doi.org/10.3386/w8295</ref>.

There are important moderators to this effect, most notably multicultural and economically egalitarian policies<ref>Van Der Meer, T., & Tolsma, J. (2014). Ethnic diversity and its effects on social cohesion. Annual Review of Sociology, 40(1), 459–478. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-071913-043309</ref><ref>Kesler, C., & Bloemraad, I. (2010). Does Immigration Erode Social Capital? The Conditional Effects of Immigration-Generated Diversity on Trust, Membership, and Participation across 19 Countries, 1981–2000. Canadian Journal of Political Science, 43(2), 319–347. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0008423910000077</ref>. More contact with out-group members, which is likely related to multicultural policy, is also a notable moderator<ref>Christ, O., Schmid, K., Lolliot, S., Swart, H., Stolle, D., Tausch, N., Ramiah, A. A., Wagner, U., Vertovec, S., & Hewstone, M. (2014). Contextual effect of positive intergroup contact on outgroup prejudice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(11), 3996–4000. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1320901111</ref><ref>Dinesen, P. T., Schaeffer, M., & Sønderskov, K. M. (2020). Ethnic Diversity and Social Trust: A Narrative and Meta-Analytical Review. Annual Review of Political Science, 23(1), 441–465. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-052918-020708</ref><ref>Department of Psychology and Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA, Code Ocean, New York, NY, USA, & Department of Political Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. (2018). The contact hypothesis re-evaluated. Behavioural Public Policy, 3–2, 129–158. https://www.cambridge.org/core/services/aop-cambridge-core/content/view/142C913E7FA9E121277B29E994124EC5/S2398063X18000258a.pdf/contact_hypothesis_reevaluated.pdf</ref>. Not only can these effects moderate the relationship between ethnic diversity and social cohesion but in some cases they can in fact perhaps reverse it<ref>Reeskens, T. (2010). Investigating the conditional effect of Ethnic-Cultural diversity on generalized trust. In International Conference “Migration: A World in Motion.” https://migrant-integration.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/2010-04/docl_13051_880029663.pdf</ref>. Still, the evidence is not completely one-way on whether moderators completely eliminate the effect of ethnic diversity on social cohesion. It appears that ethnicity can exacerbate social problems when coupled with problems such as wealth inequality, which can often occur along racial lines, but it is likely the case that even ethnic diversity alone at least in some contexts can reduce social cohesion. Neal & Neal (2014) argues that there is a tradeoff between the creation of a sense of community and a fostering of respect for diversity within neighborhoods<ref>Neal, Z. P., & Neal, J. W. (2013). The (In)compatibility of Diversity and Sense of Community. American Journal of Community Psychology, 53(1–2), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10464-013-9608-0</ref>. These effects may not translate from a local context to a cross-national context<ref>Hooghe, M., Reeskens, T., Stolle, D., & Trappers, A. (2008). Ethnic diversity and generalized trust in Europe. Comparative Political Studies, 42(2), 198–223. https://doi.org/10.1177/0010414008325286</ref>.

Moving onto research about conflict, there is competing literature on the question of the relationship between ethnic diversity and conflict<ref>Ethnic polarization, potential conflict, and civil wars. (2004). In Unknown. https://www.econ.upf.edu/~reynal/aer_final_conflict.pdf</ref><ref>https://polisci.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/people/u3833/DiversityConflictandDemocracy.pdf</ref><ref>Esteban, J., Mayoral, L., & Ray, D. (2012). Ethnicity and Conflict: An Empirical study. American Economic Review, 102(4), 1310–1342. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.4.1310</ref>, although it varies by the measurement of diversity used. Ethnic fractionalization, which is the probability that two randomly selected people are from different ethnicities, has lesser negative effects or null effects when compared to ethnic polarization, which is how close ethnic divisions map onto a binary distribution. A related measure is an aggregate measure which takes into account ethnic distribution, effective power, and probability of across group interactions and this positively predicts conflict<ref>Kovacic, M., & Zoli, C. (2021). Ethnic distribution, effective power and conflict. Social Choice and Welfare, 57(2), 257–299. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00355-021-01317-y</ref>. In other words, the degree to which one group is in power and the degree to which ethnic exclusion occurs predicts conflict significantly, more so than other measures of ethnic diversity which only look at distribution of ethnicities without reference to relative power. Probably the most robust piece of evidence would be to look at population genetic diversity and how it relates to conflict. Arbatl et al. (2015) found that this predicts conflict across countries as well as within ethnic homelands<ref>https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w21079/w21079.pdf</ref>.

This doesn't mean that in all contexts ethnic diversity will necessarily promote conflict. In areas where people recognize the need for unification as a product of ethnic differences, ethnic diversity can be the catalyst which brings about peace<ref>https://polisci.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/people/u3833/DiversityConflictandDemocracy.pdf</ref>. However, it may be the case that in other areas where this doesn't occur, it's arguably better to separate groups through physical and political boundaries to prevent conflict from occurring<ref>https://arxiv.org/abs/1110.1409</ref><ref>https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4939-1705-1_12</ref>. Interestingly, however, high residential mobility is another important moderator for this effect. High residential mobility has been found to result in lower levels of out-group hostility<ref>https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4672305/pdf/srep17963.pdf</ref>. In short, it appears that ethnic diversity has an inconsistent but generally positive effect on conflict between groups. Furthermore, there is research suggesting that ethnic heterogeneity increases crime<ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01924036.2007.9678758</ref><ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0011128718768726</ref>.

Ethnic diversity appears to be negatively related to altruism as well, with research suggesting that ethnic diversity is associated with lower levels of charitable giving<ref>https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w17618/w17618.pdf</ref>.

Moving from a homogenous school district to one in which two racial groups have equal population shares is associated with lower school performance, holding educational spending constant<ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1536-7150.2010.00721.x</ref>. Ethnic diversity also appears to increase the probability of classroom disruption in schools, although in countries with a more inclusive migration policy students are at least less harmed by the ethnic diversity effect<ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03055698.2015.955750</ref>.

So much of the research on the social effects suggests that ethnic diversity can increase conflict.

#### Economic Effects: Mixed

Looking at research on overall economic growth, the evidence points to null or negative effects of ethnic diversity on economic growth. This effect is largest in poorer countries with weak institutions and becomes null in rich democracies which have good institutions to be able to manage ethnic diversity<ref>http://www.sba.muohio.edu/davisgk/growth%20readings/1.pdf</ref><ref>https://archive.is/HSsBl</ref><ref>https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w10313/w10313.pdf</ref>. There are some more specific lines of evidence that can be examined. One is how ethnic diversity affects institutions which predict economic growth, such as public goods provision<ref>https://www.nber.org/papers/w5677</ref>, as well as other institutions which are generally positive but may not predict economic growth such as environmental protection<ref>https://archive.is/wF2el</ref>. Ethnic diversity also appears to have a negative effect on the provision of public goods.

Much of the literature on ethnic diversity and its effects in workplaces, however, is more sympathetic to diversity as a means to improve economic performance. It is conceivable from the outset that while diversity has negative effects or null effects on economic growth as a whole, there could be channels which operate either way to sway that value. Firm productivity could swing it positively, for example. Some research has suggested that ethnic diversity is positive for worker productivity and innovation<ref>https://wol.iza.org/articles/superdiversity-social-cohesion-and-economic-benefits</ref><ref>https://www.insurance.ca.gov/diversity/41-ISDGBD/GBDExternal/upload/McKinseyDivmatters-201501.pdf</ref><ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1745691615598513</ref><ref>http://www.na-businesspress.com/JBD/JBD17-3/HendersonL_17_3_.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.bcg.com/en-us/publications/2018/how-diverse-leadership-teams-boost-innovation</ref>. Additional research has suggested that racial diversity congruence with the general population has positive effects on firm productivity<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0149206315579511</ref>.

However, research which disaggregates ethnic diversity from associated factors which affect firm productivity, such as viewpoint diversity and diversity in education suggests that this isn't itself due to racial diversity per se but rather due to cultural differences that may themselves be correlated with racial diversity<ref>https://ftp.iza.org/dp6973.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13504851.2015.1130785</ref><ref>https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/EJIM-09-2021-0474/full/html</ref>. In fact, when accounting for this, racial diversity has a negative impact on firm productivity and innovation. Further evidence for this hypothesis is how assimilation or integration, which attempts to erase cultural differences between ethnic groups, appears to reduce the productivity externalities derived from immigrant diversity, due to increased levels of cultural proximity<ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00130095.2021.1897462</ref>. Another meta-analysis found that functional background diversity, and educational background diversity was positively related to innovation, while race and sex diversity were slightly negatively related to team performance<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0149206310365001</ref>.

Research which bases its conclusions on the personal experiences of employees paints a different picture, suggesting that ethnic diversity does positively affect performance<ref>https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/au/Documents/human-capital/deloitte-au-hc-diversity-inclusion-soup-0513.pdf</ref><ref>https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/about-deloitte/us-inclus-millennial-influence-120215.pdf</ref><ref>https://yello.co/blog/diversity-in-the-workplace-statistics/</ref>. It's possible that this could result in some workplaces performing better when they are diverse, merely because people believe that ethnic diversity increases productivity. What I think is more important in explaining this, however, is that people don't consider diversity to be positive because different ethnic groups are being brought together per se, but because of viewpoint diversity and educational diversity which may occur along ethnic lines. Still, there could be a degree of a placebo effect. It should be noted that diversity and inclusion initiatives aren't simply about representation but can also be associated with anti-discrimination initiatives which improve employee retention. This can result in diversity initiatives having positive effects on productivity<ref>https://www.kaporcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/TechLeavers2017.pdf</ref>. 

Given that these initiatives likely predict in many circumstances the level of ethnic diversity within firms, it is possible that this can also explain some positive overall associations between ethnic diversity and firm performance. Furthermore, this research doesn't separate between demographic and ethnic diversity necessarily.

#### Health Effects: Mixed

Ethnic diversity appears to be weakly associated with lower mental health outcomes<ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/266144169_Cultural_Diversity_and_Subjective_Wellbeing</ref><ref>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00148-017-0657-9</ref><ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327971738_Neighbourhood_Ethnic_Diversity_and_Mental_Health_in_Australia</ref>, and increases in own ethnic density are associated with improvements in mental health<ref>https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/psychological-medicine/article/abs/ethnic-density-effects-for-adult-mental-health-systematic-review-and-metaanalysis-of-international-studies/A24EC5BAF9D8B12450A940A7D3A6A887</ref><ref>https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/the-british-journal-of-psychiatry/article/ethnic-density-as-a-buffer-for-psychotic-experiences-findings-from-a-national-survey-empiric/6996920C34314755C7D02BC7C0C016FB</ref>. It should be noted however that this effect varies between individuals of different psychological orientations<ref>https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3321720</ref>. Individuals with low openness and low particularized trust tend to have lower psychological well-being as a result of immigration, which is typically associated with increases in ethnic diversity. On the other hand, immigration increases the psychological well-being of individuals with high openness and high particularized trust. In terms of general health, ethnic diversity and general health are inversely related to one another<ref>https://archive.is/UF8IT</ref><ref>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11205-016-1454-7</ref>. Additionally, ethnic diversity appears to itself contribute to poverty levels<ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0305750X17300694?via%3Dihub</ref>.

### The Effects of Interracial Marriage

Interracial marriages, because they go in opposition to natural ingroup bias, are naturally seen as non-normative by people. Among non-blacks there is more stigma and disapproval attached to relationships with blacks than to relationships with members of other groups<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22081799/</ref>. Furthermore, interracial couples elicit disgust and are dehumanized relative to same-race couples<ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0022103116300555</ref>.

Interracial relationships also suffer from a number of issues, such as an increased likelihood of divorce or termination<ref>https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2000/demo/interracial-instability.pdf</ref><ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1741-3729.2008.00491.x</ref><ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0049089X04000882</ref>, increases in severe distress<ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0049089X05000438</ref>, higher mortalityInterracial marriage is significantly associated with higher mortality risk than same-race marriages, even after controlling for sociodemographic covariates<ref>https://paa2012.populationassociation.org/papers/122630#:~:text=Pooled%20Data%20from%201986%20to,controlling%20for%20socio%2Ddemographic%20covariates.</ref>., and generally suffer from more relationship issues <ref>https://sci-hub.ru/https://doi.org/10.1037/a0025767</ref>.

These issues likely arise for two reasons. First, people are genetically inclined to choose as social partners those who resemble themselves at a genetic level<ref>https://sci-hub.ru/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2005.01574.x</ref>. Those who go against this inclination are thus likely more likely to suffer from issues. Second, those who pursue interracial relationships likely have non-normative views on the world in general, which might correlate with lower relationship satisfaction, worse mental health, along with other things. Some evidence suggests that mixed-race children tend to be disproportaiontely at risk:

- Mixed race adolescents had higher risk when compared with single race adolescents on general health questions, school experience, smoking and drinking, among other risk variables<ref>https://archive.ph/dZqP1</ref>.
- US students of mixed race are more likely than others to suffer from depression, substance abuse, sleep problems, and various aches and pains<ref>https://archive.ph/Js25I</ref>.
- Those of mixed black-white ancestry fall between blacks and whites in regard to self-rated overall health and have the worst self-rated mental health<ref>https://archive.ph/0Ezku</ref>.

This is likely due to selection bias amongst those who choose ot be interracial parents, as well as possible identity issues related to being mixed-race. Research on admixture and IQ suggests that outbreeding depression is not a major factor in explaining these outcomes. Similarly, there is mixed evidence on whether mixed-race children are more or less likely to have malformations from birth. Some congenital malformations are more common amongst births to parents of mixed race-ethnicity, while others are less common<ref>https://archive.ph/5kPn1</ref>.

### How to Accommodate for Ethnic Diversity

### Why Ethnostates and Racialism are Cringe and Dumb

### Identity Politics is Inevitable

## The Modern Narrative on Racism

In Canada, 40.9% of blacks reported experiencing discrimination or unfair treatment in the past 5 years due to their race or skin color, compared to 13.8% of First Nations, Metis, or Inuit, 19% of other groups designated as visible minorities, and 2.8% of non-Indigenous, non-visible minorities<ref>https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/85-002-x/2022001/article/00002/tbl/tbl01-eng.htm</ref>. While this doesn't by itself imply that racism disproportionately negatively affects one group or another, it does suggest it may be the case and regardless the perception can have effects. Perceived discrimination has a significant negative effect on both mental and physical health, also increasing stress<ref>https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2747726/</ref><ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24547896/</ref>.

### Statistical Versus Taste-Based Discrimination

#### Stereotype Accuracy

There are two major types of stereotypes which are of concern when discussing stereotype accuracy. Generic stereotypes are those which make an assertion about every member of a group. On the other hand, statistical stereotypes are those which make an assertion about group averages. Research suggests that statistical stereotypes are generally accurate and group differences are often underestimated, and have been found across race and gender lines<ref>https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2015-19097-002</ref>. Some statistical stereotypes are nonetheless exaggerated, such as stereotypes about adherents to political ideologies or stereotypes about national character.

There are several moderators to this effect. More educated people tend to at least hold more accurate racial stereotypes, people with a multicultural mindset tend to have more accurate stereotypes than those with a colorblind mindset, and people who are left-wing, regardless of intelligence level, tend to hold less accurate stereotypes. Inaccurate statistical stereotypes about political differences, which were exaggerated, is a major predictor of the likelihood of one to engage in political action<ref>https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2015-19097-002</ref>. This may be a notable cause of political divides today. So therefore, from a statistical perspective, stereotyping is perfectly rational and tends to be more common amongst those who are less left-leaning, likely due to leftists being uncomfortable with the idea of stereotyping.

Importantly, however, generic stereotypes tend to predominate the decision-making of individuals, and these tend to be cognitively simpler, are often about infrequent attributes, are based on limited statistical evidence, are not very prone to change, and are often used to generate genetic explanations where they may not necessarily exist<ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/313670518_Investigating_the_cognitive_structure_of_stereotypes_Generic_beliefs_about_groups_predict_social_judgments_better_than_statistical_beliefs</ref>. Therefore, it is fair to suggest that generic stereotypes are inaccurate, while statistical stereotypes are. Because generic stereotypes are employed by people more, however, we can reasonably conclude that stereotype accuracy, at least in terms of the ways in which people process stereotypes, is low. Stereotype accuracy appears to be much more complex of an issue than is generally believed. Stereotypes can be accurate or inaccurate depending on the form they manifest and also the way in which they are applied in terms of real-world behavior. Stereotyping thus is not necessarily bad.

### Quantifying Explicit Bias

The implicit association test (IAT) is the major test which aims to measure implicit biases<ref>https://doi.apa.org/doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2F0022-3514.74.6.1464</ref>. This has been used primarily with regards to race, although there are equivalent tests for other biases. Implicit and explicit bias has been decreasing in general against social groups including sexual orientation, race, skin tone, age, disability, and body weight<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0956797618813087</ref>.

Research suggests that the relationship between IAT results and explicit bias is relatively low, although a correlation exists nonetheless<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0146167205275613</ref>. Although it is a poor predictor of explicit bias it is a good predictor of brain activity<ref>https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2Fa0032734</ref>. Associations vary widely depending on the "mental space" the person is in. This has been shown for police officers whose results vary day to day and based on sleep<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1098611117732974</ref>.

In spite of the lack of predictive power of the IAT on individual behavior, individuals are able to predict their results on the IAT with a high degree of accuracy<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24294868/</ref>. This, along with evidence presented above, suggests that the IAT is measuring some real psychological state, even if it poorly predicts explicit behavior. While the IAT is lacking in terms of its predictive power of individual behavior, on the aggregate it has some predictive power. It doesn't appear to predict clinical decision-making<ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/acem.13214</ref>, but research suggests the IAT can predict system-justifying preferences of all kinds, discriminatory decision-making, political judgments and behaviors, and voting behavior<ref>https://sci-hub.ru/https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721418797309</ref>. Implicit measures are difficult to change, so arguably it isn't fruitful to establish procedures in whatever contexts which explicitly attempt to change people's implicit biases<ref>https://psyarxiv.com/dv8tu/</ref>.

The IAT might be a somewhat useful tool for examining population differences in bias in a particular domain, but it has substantial flaws and should be used with caution.

### Unfair Bias as a Factor in Disparities

It is generally asserted that because racial disparities exist that there must be discrimination involved. But understanding group differences in cognitive ability severely undermines this narrative, because of an extremely important set of facts:

The racial disparity in wages is entirely explained by differences in skills and abilities<ref>https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/262045</ref>. In fact, not only does research suggest that the racial disparity in earnings disappears once cognitive ability itself is controlled for, but the returns to cognitive ability are higher for blacks than for nonblacks<ref>https://personal.lse.ac.uk/kanazawa/pdfs/MDE2005.pdf</ref><ref>https://psyarxiv.com/qty3n/</ref><ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/229357056_Occupation_and_income_related_to_psychometric_g</ref>.

This has MASSIVE implications for the notion that bias is a factor in group disparities. One might see this information and suggest that this only suggests that there exists no racial discrimination in economics, but this would naturally translate into other areas. Gaps in education, crime, or health naturally have effects on economics independent of intelligence which if were a product of discrimination would translate into black people having lower wages and wealth for the same IQ score. And yet we don't see this. Two major inferences can be drawn from this:

*Firstly, present discrimination is likely not a major factor driving racial disparities in general. It may play some role but it is not likely to be large. To the degree that it does exist, discrimination is likely to be rational and statistical in nature as opposed to taste-based, which is by nature irrational.

*Secondly, if discrimination is to play a big factor in disparities, it would have to be a product of factors prior to black people and white people being born, such as past discrimination. It is possible that historical factors which left black people in the economic situation they are in play a partial role in explaining racial disparities, but this is much different from asserting that present discrimination does.

Furthermore, white people appear to exhibit a significantly lower racial bias than other racial groups. As shown earlier, white people have the lowest ingroup preference of any racial group, and white liberals in fact have an outgroup preference<ref>https://www.tabletmag.com/sections/news/articles/americas-white-saviors</ref>. Meta-analytic experimental research suggests that white people on net do not have any strong racial bias in favor of or against black people, while black people have a small to moderate bias in favor of black people<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/2053168017753862</ref>. White people likely have some degree of racial bias, but this is small, and in many cases the bias may balance itself out.

To see this, imagine that there were two groups, group A and group B. Group A has twice the population, but half the bias of group B. On average, both groups will face a similar level of bias, because while the minority group has by definition fewer members, they exhibit more bias which will balance the disparity in numbers out.

It should also be noted that much of the research on racism suffers from publication bias. Due to a lack of meta-analytic data in many areas, as well as a lack of tests for publication bias even amongst research which looks at these issues, it is difficult to see how much publication bias affects particular results. However, it is consistently found that after correcting for publication bias, racial disparities go down significantly or are eliminated. Hence, one should take caution in interpreting particular studies as evidence of racism, and should generally assume that a particular study probably exaggerates the true degree of racial bias in a particular domain.

#### Economic

Seeing as racial earnings gaps appear to be primarily due to differences in IQ, and hence taste-based discrimination is unlikely to account for a large amount of the gap, the information should be cross-checked with research attempting to quantify discrimination, if it occurs at all.

***Employment Discrimination: Little to no Bias -** Meta-analytical evidence suggests that identical resumes sent to employers, with the only difference in resume being name, result in different rates of callbacks, with resumes with white-sounding names getting more callbacks than resumes with black or Latino-sounding names<ref>https://www.pnas.org/content/114/41/10870</ref><ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1369183X.2015.1133279?journalCode=cjms20</ref>. Some have theorized that rather than this discrimination being due to irrational biases on the part of employers, it is instead due to employers using race as a proxy for unobservable characteristics which also affect an individual's job performance beyond what is included on a resume. There is some evidence for this hypothesis being true, but it doesn't seem to account for all of the discrimination observed<ref>https://academic.oup.com/sf/article/99/2/732/5816667</ref>. For example, differences in German-speaking countries where more extensive application material is the norm and from public sector employers where application material is more standardized, there is more attention to diversity, and non-discriminatory hiring practices are often explicitly sought, suggest statistical discrimination. However, given the similar hiring decisions for immigrants of different generations, this suggests that there is also taste-based discrimination<ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1369183X.2015.1133279?journalCode=cjms20</ref>.

*Covariates such as the inclusion of a criminal record don't appear to substantially affect the results, which one would expect to decrease the disparity if the statistical discrimination hypothesis was true<ref>https://www.pnas.org/content/114/41/10870</ref>. Some data which looks at variations in resume quality and increases in data in general also reveal a similar pattern, although this is contradicted by other evidence. This suggests there may be some statistical discrimination at play but it does not account for the totality of the explanation for the hiring gap.

*Another piece of evidence for the statistical discrimination hypothesis however is how "ban the box" policies which restrict employers from asking about applicants' criminal histories on job applications result in more discrimination happening against minorities<ref>https://law.yale.edu/sites/default/files/area/workshop/leo/leo16_starr.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/705880</ref>, suggesting that decreasing information to employers, through increasing their reliance on unobservable measures of competence in a job, increases statistical discrimination.

*It has been demonstrated that if the effect of improved productivity signals or resumes to employers on hiring is nonlinear, certain ways in which unobserved skills can be distributed between two populations can result in discrimination being shown in studies when it doesn't exist<ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/2646964?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents</ref>. Unfortunately, this may mean that none of this data definitively demonstrates the existence of racial bias in hiring, although I am intuitively skeptical of the idea that the relationship is nonlinear beyond initial requirements for a job.

*However, the actual influence this has on the results of audit studies must be very large, as evidence has suggested that with identical resumes, a black applicant without a criminal record is less likely to be called back for a job interview than a white applicant with a criminal record, in spite of the fact that a criminal record has a drastic effect on a person's probability of being employed<ref>https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/374403</ref><ref>https://www.epi.org/publication/webfeatures_snapshots_archive_09172003/</ref>. Because such an effect must be very large, without evidence in favor of an effect even being real it seems reasonable to assume that it likely at least does not eliminate all of the discrimination that is observed in the studies presented above.

*Interestingly, there is evidence suggesting that the discrimination occurring is partially class-based, as black-sounding names with a more positive socioeconomic connotation don't appear to be discriminated against<ref>https://www.sociologicalscience.com/download/vol-4/september/SocSci_v4_469to489.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13504851.2015.1114571</ref>. This doesn't disprove that unjust racial discrimination is occurring, but it does suggest that it is concentrated on the intersection between race and class.

*In response to the discrimination that minorities face in the labor market, many racial minorities attempt to make their resumes more "white" in appearance. However, when applying for jobs with employers who present themselves as valuing diversity, minorities engage less in this. Unfortunately, organizational diversity statements are not actually associated with reduced discrimination against unwhitened resumes so pro-diversity employers are actually more discriminatory in effect<ref>http://www-2.rotman.utoronto.ca/facbios/file/Whitening%20MS%20R2%20Accepted.pdf</ref>.

*Overall, there appears to be some degree of hiring discrimination, which may mean that a black person on average has to submit slightly more job applications to get the same number of callbacks as a white person, although a lot of this is statistical as opposed to taste-based.

***Mortgages and Loans: No Bias -** There is evidence of mortgage discrimination occurring against blacks who have identical credit profiles, in terms of rejecting more profiles and having higher mortgage interest rates<ref>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12552-019-09276-x</ref><ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/25764804</ref><ref>https://sci-hub.ru/https://doi.org/10.1007/s11146-014-9473-0</ref><ref>https://ia601406.us.archive.org/32/items/cfljuly1995-95-pdf/cfljuly1995-95-pdf.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/01/10/blacks-and-hispanics-face-extra-challenges-in-getting-home-loans/</ref>. However, even controlling for credit score, black people are more likely to default on their mortgage/loan, meaning it makes sense to accept fewer applicants<ref>https://sci-hub.ru/https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01099279</ref><ref>https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/rptcongress/creditscore/creditscore.pdf</ref>. Racial disparities in mortgage costs completely go away when accounting for differences in discount points, which black borrowers pay fewer of. On net, mortgage costs appear to be identical<ref>https://academic.oup.com/rfs/article/34/2/763/5827007#226627786</ref>. Further evidence that whatever discrimination occurs is statistical discrimination comes from the fact that profits are equal or less from black borrowers compared to white borrowers, suggesting that black people are not being systematically disadvantaged from the lending policy<ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/25764804</ref><ref>https://academic.oup.com/rfs/article/34/2/763/5827007#226627786</ref>.

***Rental Market: Little to no Bias -** Research suggests that there is discrimination in the rental housing market. These results are inflated by publication bias, but even after correcting for publication bias there is evidence of discrimination. Importantly however, much of this discriminatory behavior can be attributed to missing information about the social status of applicants, which suggests that much of this disparity is due to statistical discrimination<ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1369183X.2018.1489223</ref>. Therefore, the degree to which bias plays a role is likely small.

**Other Economic/Housing Info:**

Blacks and hispanics engage in more conspicuous consumption than whites<ref>https://sci-hub.ru/https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2009.124.2.425</ref>.

The racial wealth gap can be almost entirely explained by differences in observable factors, such as life cycle patterns, educational attainment, inheritance, attitudes toward saving and investing, and more<ref>https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2015/files/2015076pap.pdf</ref>.

There is very little intergenerational mobility in net wealth for both black and white families according to data between 1984 and 2013<ref>https://ia601708.us.archive.org/9/items/source-872-toney-2016/Source872%20Toney2016.pdf</ref>.

There exist ethnic group differences in measures of job performance. These differences are larger on objective measures compared to subjective measures<ref>https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2F0021-9010.88.4.694</ref>.

When comparing former slaves and free blacks (free before 1865), it took roughly 2 generations for the descendents of slaves to catch up economically and educationally with the descendents of free black men and women<ref>https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w9227/w9227.pdf</ref>.

A black family's long-run economic progress after slavery depended strongly on the location they were freed. Black families freed in states with more intensive Jim Crow institutions made less economic progress after slavery<ref>https://irs.princeton.edu/events/2022/Fall-Althoff-Lukas</ref>.

There is mixed evidence on the effect of gentrification on crime<ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1467-9906.2010.00506.x</ref><ref>https://academic.oup.com/socpro/article/58/4/615/1667054</ref><ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0011128714549652</ref><ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/07418825.2014.943799</ref><ref>https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w23914/w23914.pdf</ref>. Some of these differences can be resolved through noting that gentrification appears to increase crime in the short run and decrease crime in the long-run, but also that its negative effects on crime is primarily concentrated in the frontier of where gentrification occurs in a neighborhood.

The economic and residential segregation created by redlining persists in many cities, and inequality is much higher in cities which had redlining. Gentrification appears to be related to some lessening of segregation, but also with increased economic inequality<ref>https://ncrc.org/wp-content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2018/02/NCRC-Research-HOLC-10.pdf</ref>.

Redlining may be mostly a product of geographic discrimination in itself as opposed to racial discrimination<ref>https://sci-hub.ru/https://doi.org/10.2307/2946707</ref>.

#### Criminal

The degree to which the criminal justice system unfairly targets black people would have a substantial effect on the labor market outcomes of blacks relative to whites independent of cognitive ability differentials. Being unfairly targeted and thrown in prison, brutalized, etc. would have effects on the ability for blacks to get jobs and disrupt their income streams. Given our prior understanding of how blacks earn the same or more than whites of the same cognitive ability, the default hypothesis should thus be that racial bias is small to nonexistent in the criminal justice system.

The most well-researched issue regarding racial bias in the criminal justice system is the degree to which there is racial bias in police use of force. It is also the issue that is the most commonly discussed, as movements such as Black Lives Matter built themselves off of the concern that blacks were being unfairly brutalized by cops. Research on the degree to which police use of force is racially biased is mixed, possibly due to differences in methodology, or due to there being pockets of racism or lack of racism around areas studied<ref>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12103-016-9378-y</ref>. Several pieces of information are of note however:

*A 2015 meta-analysis found that looking at studies, the aggregate effect size reveals a statistically significant effect of race on the decision to shoot a suspect. However, after controlling for publication bias, this effect COMPLETELY goes away<ref>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12103-014-9278-y</ref>. This suggests that publication bias plays a significant role in the racial shooting bias literature.

*Meta-analytic research utilizing experimental shooting studies suggests that there is a lower shooting threshold for black targets, although this is experimental and thus may not translate into real-world behavior<ref>https://media.spokesman.com/documents/2016/05/The_Reverse_Racism_Effect.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0022103115000992</ref>. Furthermore, there appear to be no tests for publication bias in this research, suggesting it may overestimate the true effect in a similar way to real-world research on the subject.

*While there may be no net effect of race on the decision to shoot a suspect, this is necessarily conditional upon an encounter having occurred. If there is a differential probability of an encounter occurring in the first place that is due to racial bias, then there could still be racial bias in use of force. This is an area where intuitively it may be more likely that racial bias actually occurs, as there is naturally more procedural leeway in choosing to approach a suspect as opposed to choosing to shoot a suspect. Examining overall use of force may capture this effect. The evidence overall suggests that when accounting for the differential probability of arrest of black and white suspects there is a disparity in police use of force<ref>https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/703541</ref><ref>https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pandp.20191028</ref><ref>https://spssi.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/am-pdf/10.1111/josi.12243</ref><ref>https://www.nature.com/articles/s41599-018-0110-z</ref><ref>https://scholarship.law.columbia.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3660&context=faculty_scholarship</ref><ref>https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0141854</ref><ref>https://amstat.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/2330443X.2019.1704330?needAccess=true</ref>. This disparity turns anti-white when controlling for crime<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/1948550618775108</ref><ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0047235219304398</ref>. However, once disaggregating between armed criminals and unarmed innocent civilians, there is an anti-white bias against armed criminals and an anti-black bias against unarmed innocent civilians<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/1948550620916071</ref>. There appears to be no net effect or a net anti-white effect in terms of racial bias in police use of force. However, the disaggregation results are of note.

*There is no consistent evidence suggesting that officer race substantially affects police use of force<ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/puar.12956</ref><ref>https://www.pnas.org/content/116/32/15877</ref><ref>https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1919418117</ref><ref>https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w26774/w26774.pdf</ref><ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/puar.12734</ref>. This furthermore suggests that the effect of race on officer's use of force is likely small, as in spite of the natural ingroup preference black officers would likely have which would lessen their anti-black bias or increase their anti-white bias, the net effect of officer race on decisions to shoot is too small to be consistently found across studies.

*In spite of the falsity of the narrative that there is rampant racial bias in use of force, these stories and narratives are continuously spread around in the media. Exposure to more police killings of unarmed black Americans, which as demonstrated before is in part a product of racial bias, decreases the mental health of black Americans<ref>https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(18)31130-9/fulltext</ref>. This information is being circulated potentially at the expense of the mental health of black Americans.

So the overall research suggests that there is bias in officer's use of force, but this is heavily confounded by publication bias, and when controlling for publication bias, the effect of racial bias goes away. Unfortunately, I am not aware of any other research in the criminal justice racial bias literature which examines possible publication bias in results. Therefore, the results of particular studies in other fields of the criminal justice system should be taken with caution. This is especially because it would be extremely unlikely that racial bias would somehow appear in, for example, sentencing decisions, and yet have zero effect in police use of force. These domains likely cross over quite heavily, so there is no reason why intuitively one would expect racial bias to persist in other areas of the criminal justice system but not in police use of force. In fact, intuitively, one could make the argument that those in the police force would be the most likely to exercise racial bias, given that police probably skew more politically right, tend to value hierarchy more, and thus may have a stronger ingroup preference. The most parsimonious explanation is that at most racial bias plays a very small role in other domains of the criminal justice system.

With that being said, here is an overview of research into other domains of the criminal justice system:

***Sentencing/Conviction: Little to no Bias -** There is considerable conflict in empirical research results examining racial bias in sentencing decisions. On aggregate, there is no statistically significant effect but using a white/non-white racial classification scheme increases the likelihood of finding a significant result. Conflict also appears to be heavily a product of methodological differences between studies<ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0047235298000282</ref>.

*White defendants are 25% more likely than black defendants to have their initial charge dropped or reduced to a lesser crime, a disparity that goes away when comparing white and black defendants with prior convictions<ref>https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3036726</ref>. African-American prisoners convicted of murder or rape are more likely to be innocent than other convicted murderers or rapists<ref>http://www.law.umich.edu/special/exoneration/Documents/Race_and_Wrongful_Convictions.pdf</ref>.

*Complaints by black and Latino citizens against white officers are less likely to be sustained, while incidents alleged by white citizens in high-crime and predominantly black neighborhoods are more likely to be sustained<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1111/cico.12388</ref>. Even after controlling for previous professional and judicial experience, educational background, qualification ratings, and differences in appellate panel composition, black federal district judges are consistently overturned on appeal more often than white district judges<ref>https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/msen/files/sen_reversal.pdf</ref>.

*Black defendants are assigned greater bail levels than whites accused of similar offenses<ref>https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1990324</ref>. This overall suggests that racial bias may exist to some degree but only on the edges and not in terms of overall sentencing.

***Arrests: Possibly Some Bias -** Blacks, males, and Hispanics are more likely to be arrested than whites, females, and non-Hispanics, even after controlling for offense seriousness, amount of evidence, whether the suspect was under the influence of drugs or alcohol, whether the suspect used a weapon, the demeanor of the suspect, and whether the suspect committed a crime in front of the officer during an encounter<ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0047235214000890</ref>. There was little evidence of publication bias in the overall effect sizes, although it is possible that when looking at studies which use a heavy amount of controls there could be publication bias. This suggests overall that there may be some bias, although the evidence doesn't appear to be strong when taking into account other findings in other areas of the criminal justice system.

***Traffic Stops: Little to no Bias -** Pierson et al. (2020) analyzed nearly 100 million traffic stops across the US and found that black drivers are less likely to be stopped after sunset when a veil of darkness clouds one's face<ref>https://5harad.com/papers/100M-stops.pdf?utm_source=The+Appeal&utm_campaign=3a050d7014-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2018_08_09_04_14_COPY_01&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_72df992d84-3a050d7014-58394763</ref>. This suggests bias in stop decisions. There are other studies however which have found no indication of racial bias when using a veil of darkness test<ref>https://amstat.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1198/016214506000000168?casa_token=TyYOszQOPsAAAAAA%3Ab6D7UhNTlyYCsRYT6u-6uQOdudvgFJF89H-0l95JvtDeCTC1PFdLlfkD9MKGseeG3GUI81eW71os&#.YjKDGurMI2y</ref><ref>https://sci-hub.ru/https://doi.org/10.1177/1098611111433027</ref>. Horrace & Rohlin (2016) attempts to address Grogger and Ridgeway by refining their test through controlling for streetlight locations as opposed to simply looking at daylight versus nighttime. They find that after controlling for this the odds of a black driver being stopped relative to nonblack drivers increase 15% in daylight compared to darkness, suggesting bias<ref>https://sci-hub.ru/https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00543</ref>. Baumgartner et al. (2018) analyzed over 40 million traffic stops and found that racial disparities in traffic stop outcomes cannot be fully explained by contextual factors such as the reason why the car was pulled over, the neighborhood that the stop took place, the time of day, or the age of the vehicle, or the race of the officer<ref>https://fbaum.unc.edu/TrafficStops/Baumgartner-etal-MeasuringDisparities-20May2018.pdf</ref>. This suggests that black and hispanic drivers are subjected to harsher police behaviors than whites.

*However, the racial composition of speeders differs from that of non speeding drivers and closely approximates the racial composition of police stops, which suggests no racial profiling in traffic stops<ref>https://sci-hub.ru/https://doi.org/10.1080/07418820500088952</ref><ref>https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtual-library/abstracts/speeding-while-black-assessing-generalizability-lange-et-als-2001</ref>. Despite this, minorities are less likely to receive a discount on their speeding tickets than white drivers<ref>https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3627809</ref>. This suggests the potential for some bias to exist in traffic stops.

***Pedestrian Stops: Little to no Bias -** Some research suggests there exists anti-black bias in stops which persist even after controlling for crime or unlawfulness<ref>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1198/016214506000001040</ref><ref>https://www.aclum.org/sites/default/files/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/reports-black-brown-and-targeted.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.acludc.org/sites/default/files/2020_06_15_aclu_stops_report_final.pdf</ref>. This is contradicted by other research<ref>https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/213004.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.rand.org/pubs/technical_reports/TR534.html</ref><ref>https://sci-hub.se/https://doi.org/10.1086/684292</ref><ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0734016816648188?journalCode=cjra</ref>. Therefore, the effect appears to be either inconsistent, small on net, or null. Importantly however, Unnever et al. (2017) finds that even after controlling for a wide range of factors, African Americans report significantly more trouble with the police<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2153368717697104</ref>. This suggests that regardless of the degree to which racial bias actually exists, black people may report getting into more trouble with the police. Emphasis on the word "report".

***Juries: Little to no Bias -** Mazzella & Feingold (1994) meta-analyzed experimental research on mock juror judgments and found that there was no overall effect of race on mock jurors' judgments<ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1559-1816.1994.tb01552.x</ref>. There were no differences in punishment for robbery, assault, or rape, but jurors recommended greater punishment for blacks than for whites with negligent homicide, and for whites than for blacks on fraud. A more recent meta-analysis, Mitchell et al. (2005), found a small effect of racial bias in decision-making<ref>https://scholarworks.utep.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&article=1016&context=christian_meissner</ref>, but a 2014 meta-analysis, Decine & Caughlin (2014), found no net racial bias effect. There appears to be no consistent evidence that race has a significant effect on jury decisions<ref>https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Do-they-matter-A-meta-analytic-investigation-of-and-Devine-Caughlin/16101e386734fd24f0dbaaf3ae3691a002960487?p2df</ref>.

Overall, even without controls for the possibility of publication bias, which almost certainly does exist in a lot of this literature, there appears to be little evidence of any substantial degree of racial bias in the criminal justice system. This is in spite of a large-scale media apparatus actively dedicated to giving the general population the impression that rampant racism exists in our criminal justice system.

Some additional information should be noted. Each additional police officer abates approximately 0.1 homicides, effects which in per-capita terms are twice as large for black versus white victims. At the same time, larger police forces make more arrests for low-level "quality of life" offenses, which would have disproportionately burdensome effects for blacks. Thus, there is evidence that black communities are simultaneously over and under-policed<ref>https://www.nber.org/papers/w28202</ref>. Police officers may do some harm in terms of enforcing lower-level offenses to the black community, but they absolutely on net help. One homicide is abated for every additional police officer that exists within a community. Police officers absolutely do more to save the lives of black people in their communities than they do to harm them. Any narrative that says otherwise is actively harmful to the black community which activists are supposedly trying to help.

**A Note on the BLM Movement**

Black Lives Matter, or BLM, is a movement which has gained popularity and aims to address alleged systemic racism in the criminal justice system. Specifically, it takes a heavy focus on publicized killings of unarmed black men by police officers. Some of the criticisms of the movement are false or exaggerated. The BLM movement has been overwhelmingly non-violent, with 94% of all BLM demonstrations being peaceful<ref>https://acleddata.com/acleddatanew/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/ACLED_Report_A-Year-of-Racial-Justice-Protests_May2021.pdf</ref>. It has been violent, and it is understandable why many are uncomfortable with the idea of BLM protests coming into their communities, but the violence has been exaggerated. Additionally, contrary to the claims of some, BLM protests did not cause a rise in COVID within the areas where they were because they resulted in activities being averted which were more risky<ref>https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w27408/w27408.pdf</ref>.

However, it is still fighting against an issue which doesn't really exist as demonstrated. Furthermore, it likely in fact harms the black community through promoting policing practices that increase overall homicides and increasing police attrition which has a similar effect. Research suggests that BLM protests have decreased police homicides and property crimes within the areas they are located, but have increased murders in general. However, demographic imbalance in protest variation and treatment timing warrant a cautious interpretation<ref>https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3767097</ref>. While this study is definitive, it is consistent with previous research suggesting the benefits of policing in reducing homicides in the black community.

#### Educational

Bias in educational systems, if it exists, would likely have effects on the earnings of blacks relative to whites. As with examining economic and criminal justice disparities, the default hypothesis given prior information should be that there exists little to no bias in the educational system. Here I will look at the possibility of racial bias in school punishment and grading:

***School Punishment: No Bias -** There exists a racial gap between black and white students in suspensions, but this is completely accounted for by prior problem behavior<ref>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0047235214000105</ref>.

***Grading: Little Bias -** Malouff & Thorsteinsson (2016) meta-analyzed research examining whether there exists a racial bias in grading<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0004944116664618</ref>. They found a small but statistically effect of race on grading which was robust to publication bias testing. Specifically, there was 26% of a standard deviation in score differences between students in the hypothesized-bias condition and students not in that condition. In IQ terms, this would amount to one ethnic group being assessed as being on average 4 IQ points below what they actually are. There is bias, but it is small.

In summary, there may be some bias in the education system, specifically with grading, but its actual net effect is likely to be small.

**Other Education Info:**

There is a positive effect of having an own race teacher on student achievement<ref>https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-importance-of-a-diverse-teaching-force/</ref>.

Prior knowledge of race/ethnic background, education-related deficiencies, physical unattractiveness and poor quality of prior performance all have substantial and roughly equal effect sizes in determining grading, suggesting heavy bias exists<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0004944116664618</ref>.

Diversity in a classroom setting can be good in that it fosters greater social trust, a better learning environment, and more open-minded students<ref>https://drexel.edu/soe/resources/student-teaching/advice/importance-of-cultural-diversity-in-classroom/</ref>.

Students taught under faculty who underwent diversity training experienced a greater sense of community, personal growth, and conflict resolution skills<ref>https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1134528.pdf</ref>.

School desegregation has had positive effects on both educational and occupational attainments, college quality and adult earnings, reduced the probability of incarceration, and improved adult health status<ref>https://www.nber.org/papers/w16664</ref>.

Comprehensive school reform programs tend to lower the black-white achievement gap more than matched traditional schools, and their effects substantially to completely eliminated this gap in elementary middle schools<ref>https://epaa.asu.edu/ojs/index.php/epaa/article/view/708</ref>.

Harlem Children's Zone charter schools closed the black-white achievement gap in mathematics<ref>https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.3.3.158</ref>.

Improvements in the relative quality of black schools in terms of pupil-teacher ratios, annual teacher pay, and term length for black and white schools explain some of the narrowing of the black-white earnings gap between 1960 and 1980<ref>https://sci-hub.ru/https://doi.org/10.2307/2118326</ref>.

#### Health

Another question to ask is whether there is racism in health:

- **Healthcare Access: Some Bias -** I would have to quantify the exact effects shown in these studies, but research suggests that there exists low to moderate levels of implicit racial bias among healthcare professionals, which is significantly related to patient-provider interactions and health outcomes<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26469668/</ref><ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28249596/</ref>. Furthermore, experimental evidence suggests that there is racial discrimination against middle-class blacks compared to middle-class whites in accessing mental health care, although there is no discrimination between working-class blacks and whites<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0022146516647098</ref>.

#### Other

### Possible Remedying of Disparities

#### Affirmative Action

Affirmative action has a range of definitions, but is generally understood as referring ot various means by which hiring or admissions processes are changed to increase the number of minorities in institutions. This is done with the intent of equalizing group outcomes, often on the motivation that unequal group outcomes are a product of discrimination. An initial question we can examine is what the effects of affirmative action are in terms of achieving its goals:

- **In College: Effect on Minority Admissions -** The evidence suggests that affirmative action in universities has positive effects on minority admissions<ref>https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20140783</ref><ref>https://diversity.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/understanding_affrirmative_action.pdf</ref><ref>https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&u=googlescholar&id=GALE%7CA53744951&v=2.1&it=r&sid=googleScholar&asid=f46747c4</ref><ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/23261474?searchText=&searchUri=&ab_segments=&searchKey=&refreqid=fastly-default%3A9999d33bbb0ee62950e23b72868c8010#metadata_info_tab_contents</ref><ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/2962408</ref><ref>https://www.ceousa.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/VALaw.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.ceousa.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/ASU_LAW.pdf</ref>. This effect is stronger in more elite-level schools<ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/30162729.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3Ab5df27a45b1892b4eddfe0f728629c58&ab_segments=&origin=</ref>. This does come at the expense of some whites, but minority populations in these schools are still relatively small so this discrimination effect is relatively small as well.

- **In College: Effect on Minority Performance and Labor Market Effects -** While affirmative action undoubtedly does increase the admission of minorities into universities, there is debate about if this comes at the expense of minorities, who may suffer from being put into more difficult courses. This effect is known as mismatch. There is some research which suggests that mismatch occurs, with the most important study looking at law school affirmative action<ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/40040209</ref>.
- Unfortunately, this study has the problem of presupposing in their regression models that the effect of GPA and SAT performance is uniform for races. When not looking at average effects, a different picture is painted in which prior performance is less of a predictor of future performance for black people. Moreover, the effect of school selectivity on performance is negative for the general population, but looking specifically at black people it positively predicts performance<ref>https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20140783</ref><ref>https://diversity.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/understanding_affrirmative_action.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/30162729.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3Ab5df27a45b1892b4eddfe0f728629c58&ab_segments=&origin=</ref>.
- The mismatch effect could still nonetheless occur for some especially unqualified black candidates. I would need to do more research before I felt confident about this issue specifically, but it is certainly possible that in the United States, affirmative action is so extreme that it is suboptimal for advancing educational outcomes for minorities<ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/30162729.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3Ab5df27a45b1892b4eddfe0f728629c58&ab_segments=&origin=</ref><ref>https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w20962/w20962.pdf</ref>. Some research suggests still that there is a slight reduction in GPA as a result of an increase in the difference between an individual's SAT score and the institutional average, suggesting affirmative action has a negative effect on minority student outcomes<ref>https://dash.harvard.edu/bitstream/handle/1/36853299/angel_onuoha_ec_970.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y</ref>.
- Importantly, mismatch effects presuppose either that students' enrollment decisions are irrational or that selective universities possess private information which affects school performance. There is some evidence for the latter, meaning if we presuppose that the former assertion is true, making such information more public could decrease mismatch effects where they exist<ref>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.3982/QE83</ref>.
- Much of the research above on the subject suggests that the positive effects of affirmative action on minority performance translates into positive labor market effects downstream. There is some research which suggests otherwise, but this suffers from the same problem as another study mentioned before in that it assumes uniform effects of prior performance on future performance for racial groups<ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2117647.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A42e0ed4c8fa818183614196a852973f5&ab_segments=&origin=</ref>.
- In short, it appears that mismatch is not an inherent feature of affirmative action programs although it can occur when such programs are sufficiently extreme. There is little evidence that affirmative action negatively impacts school performance for minorities and the overall evidence suggests it has positive labor market effects for such groups.

So affirmative action in college may achieve its expected aims in some cases, but these are benefits which are irrelevant as the initial motivating reason for having affirmative action has been shown to be flawed.

However, beyond its direct effects on minority and majority well-being, affirmative action can also have effects through how it changes the demographic makeup of an institution. Research suggests that there appears to be positive externalities derived from the increased student diversity created as a consequence of affirmative action. Most notably, it appears to improve school performance for all groups in general, meaning that affirmative action can cause boosts for non-minority students who aren't discriminated against<ref>https://www.gse.harvard.edu/news/uk/18/07/case-affirmative-action</ref><ref>https://diversity.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/understanding_affrirmative_action.pdf</ref><ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/30162729.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3Ab5df27a45b1892b4eddfe0f728629c58&ab_segments=&origin=</ref>. This however is likely a product of intellectual diversity as opposed to demographic diversity in itself, so if this is one's aim one should seek to directly promote intellectual diversity over demographic diversity.

**The Affirmative Action Dilemma -** Mentions of affirmative action can lead people to view groups who benefit from affirmative action more negatively<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0146167298241005</ref>. Affirmative action by its very nature attempts to hire or admit those who otherwise would not have had as strong of qualifications as their competitors. Such policies necessarily lead to situations whereby people will question whether any minority in their social space got their because of their merit or something else. Affirmative action to its proponents should be viewed as something positive for minorities, yet they hate the suggestion that any individual minority is a beneficiary. This is a product of the dilemma between a sacrifice of merit and an upholding of "equity".

### Debunking False Narratives

#### "Reverse Racism Doesn't Exist"

#### Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion

#### White Privilege

White privilege views being white as a categorical good in society as it confers upon one a number of unearned advantages that those of other races do not get. This has certainly been a very popular narrative in many left-wing circles, but it is flawed from an empirical and a conceptual perspective.

**The Conceptual Issues**

Whenever discussions of white privilege come up, a common line of argument comes out from those skeptical about the idea, and it goes like this:

***White Privilege Skeptic:** "I don't think white privilege exists. I'm white and poor, how can I be privileged?"
***White Privilege Advocate:** "White privilege means that on average, white people are advantaged, not that all white people will have advantages over every black person. Furthermore, you may be poor, but you'll never be poor because you're white. If you are poor and black however, it's often because they're black and have been discriminated against."

The advocate of white privilege when challenged on the presuppositions of the concept generally falls back on the notion that white people are only privileged on average. First, from the outset it appears intuitively extremely unlikely that there has never been any situation where a white person has been discriminated against because they are white, and hence has been harmed to some degree. So suggesting that at no point will a white person be poor or screwed over because they're white appears absurd on its face.

Furthermore, note that advocates of white privilege when talking to a particular white person will call them privileged. They're not saying that on average that white person is privileged, they're just assuming they are. Let's use an edgy and humorous example to illustrate the absurdity of this. Imagine I invent a concept called "black criminality". Whenever I talk to any particular black person, I say that they have black criminality on the part of them being black, regardless of whether they actually engaged in any criminal behavior. When called out on the fact that I'm assuming all black people are criminal with my concept, I simply assert that I'm only saying that on average black people are criminal, not that every black person is criminal. Advocates of white privilege selectively talk about the concept in terms of averages or essences whenever it is convenient for establishing a narrative. The concept is thus rendered conceptually incoherent.

**The Empirical Issues**

The empirical issue is that white people are not the most privileged group in society on any measure. In terms of income, various groups do better than whites, such as Asians<ref>https://www.jstor.org/stable/1085574?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents</ref>. While some of this may be due to immigration selection bias into western countries, much of it is ceertainly also due to the higher mean IQ that asians tend to possess, something demonstrated in earlier sections to be in part genetic in origin. To the extent that empirically "privilege" may exist, it certainly is not whites who have it.

### The Effect of Anti-White Racism

Much of the mainstream narrative on race concerns the existence of anti-black racism, and oftentimes even the suggestion that anti-white racism exists can be seen as a dog-whistle for some "evil agenda". However, there is evidence that anti-white racism exists to some extent, particularly amongst liberals, even white liberals. As has been discussed before several times, white liberals are the only group of people to have an outgroup preference<ref>https://www.tabletmag.com/sections/news/articles/americas-white-saviors</ref>, suggesting from the outset that white liberals may engage in racism against their own ethnic group. There are numerous documented studies which empirically show that liberal racial bias exists to a fairly large extent:

*Political liberals, but not political conservatives are more censorious of anti-minority information when compared to anti-white information, and also view such information as less credible<ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333677484_A_Cross-cultural_Analysis_of_Censorship_on_Campuses</ref><ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/326144740_Low-status_groups_as_a_domain_of_liberal_bias</ref>. This is despite the fact that many such individuals themselves believe that they should be unbiased in their judgements.

*This appears to be due to the liberal belief in the existence of discrimination, the rejection of biological group differences, and the belief in the possibility and moral necessity of the pursuit of racial equality in society<ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325033477_Equalitarianism_A_Source_of_Liberal_Bias</ref>.

*Political liberals are also more likely to endorse consequentialism when the victim in question is white rather than black, which suggests that liberals are more sensitive to sacrificing black people when compared to white people<ref>https://journal.sjdm.org/9616/jdm9616.pdf</ref>.

*Moreover, white liberals appear to be more nervous talking to minorities when compared to white people, likely due to a liberal hyper-sensitivity to racism against minority groups<ref>https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2006-22158-006</ref><ref>https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2019-12064-001</ref>.

*In academic decision-making, there is a favoring of blacks, in spite of people possessing implicit and explicit preferences for whites over blacks<ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/290510377_An_Unintentional_Robust_and_Replicable_Pro-Black_Bias_in_Social_Judgment</ref>.

*Finally, jokes against low-status groups are seen as worse by those with low system justification (who tend to be liberals) when compared to jokes against high-status groups, while there appears to be no bias by those with high system justification (who tend to be conservatives<ref>https://psyarxiv.com/qv764</ref>.

All of this information paints a picture of white liberals overcompensating for perceived racism against black people in society, by engaging in racism in the reverse direction. Much of this risks leading to censorship of true information, an inability to communicate with those of different racial groups, and a general hatred and distrust of white people. And as demonstrated before, bias is not a major explanatory factor in racial disparities we see today in things such as wealth. So to whatever extent this is justified on the basis of correcting for an existing injustice, the reality is that said injustice is not occurring to even close to the same degree as is perceived.

Much of the diversity education industry likely harms white people as well through its instilling of racial privilege ideas and increasing white guilt. White guilt is associated with belief in white privilege and belief that Europeans are perpetrators of racial discrimination<ref>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15272965/</ref>. Furthermore, perceived racial privilege is associated with lower self-rated health and more physically and mentally unhealthy days<ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/23770469_Is_Perceived_Racial_Privilege_Associated_with_Health_Findings_from_the_Behavioral_Risk_Factor_Surveillance_System</ref>. Research suggests that diversity courses increase beliefs in white privilege and racism and more support for affirmative action. At the same time, white students express greater white guilt after completing such courses<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00986280701700250</ref>.

White guilt isn't necessarily a big problem now, but that doesn't mean that these types of courses don't contribute to it and thus harm white people. On average, white guilt amongst white people is low, but there is large range and variability. White guilt is associated with more negative personal evaluations of whites and theoretical antecedents of stronger beliefs in the existence of white privilege. White guilt mediates the relationship from white privilege and beliefs about the prevalence of discrimination to attitudes toward affirmative action, and both white guilt and prejudice independently predict attitudes toward affirmative action<ref>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0146167299025004008</ref>.

Furthermore, education about white privilege increases anti-white bias. Social liberals show more sympathy for a poor black person than a poor white person after reading about white privilege, while for social conservatives there is no difference. However, relative to conservatives, liberals are just as sympathetic to the poor white person<ref>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/332749635_Complex_Intersections_of_Race_and_Class_Among_Social_Liberals_Learning_About_White_Privilege_Reduces_Sympathy_Increases_Blame_and_Decreases_External_Attributions_for_White_People_Struggling_With_Pover</ref>.

## References

<ol id="source-list"></ol>
