---
layout: page
title: Understanding the Issue
permalink: /understanding-the-issue/
---

The Enlightenment and its subsequent material and ideological consequences created some of the world's greatest triumphs and tragedies at once. It was characterized by an explosion of rationality, of scientific advancement, of progress. It was the questioning of the dogmas of the past, and the creation of methods by which social norms could have a greater basis in reality. Arguably the most significant development to come from the enlightenment was the popularization of the scientific method. Fields which were once relegated to philosophy, once reduced to syllogistic verbal argumentation based more on intuition than on predictive power, became fields where truth could be ascertained. Natural philosophy became natural science. The mysteries of the universe began to become significantly more clear, and less mysterious to our perception.

With this advancement came a tragedy. Nietzsche proclaimed with the rise of the enlightenment, that "God is dead". The Enlightenment came with it a decline in religiosity. People not only became less religious over time, but it almost became impossible to be religious. The gaps in our world that God was said to fill, were determined more and more to be due to other factors, and the perceived role of the supernatural and divine in our world became less and less. But there was one gap that without a god it was very difficult to fill. That was the gap in our meaning. Religion structured the everyday lives of people in the past. It guided all sorts of parts of their day-to-day lives. And without that easy guide, we are forced to confront our own mortality and ask ourselves why we must go on living.

The challenge was that our sense of purpose was wrapped up in a story which did not correspond to reality. And so when we started developing our epistemology to better discover reality, we were forced to confront the contradiction between what we wanted to believe, and what was. And this is something which is very difficult to get around. With the absence of perfect knowledge about the world, any metanarrative you presuppose, such as that of a god, is necessarily going to risk contradicting reality in some way. And when that contradiction sneaks up, it becomes impossible to believe the metanarrative.

It wouldn't be entirely true to suggest that we live in a world without any attempts to find meaning. Karl Marx, arguably one of the most influential intellectuals of all time, famously said "Philosophers have only interpreted the world. The point, however, is to change it". Marx attempted to create his own narrative to understand the world, suggesting that the fundamental conflict within society was class-based, and that with the resolution of the contradictions between classes a utopia would arise. He suggested that capitalism was one stage within historical development, which would inevitably be finite and give way to socialism or communism. There have been numerous interpretations of Marx's thought, and numerous movements around the world which have attempted to put his ideas into practice, to create the utopia that Marx dreamed of. But with this attempt, the contradiction between the story or narrative and reality became apparent.

There were many intellectuals who witnessed the failures of socialism, yet still believed that there was oppression within capitalism which must be quashed. Some of these intellectuals were the originators of critical theory, which has had numerous intellectual offshoots throughout the 20th century. All of these offshoots focused on oppression on the basis of one or more characteristics. Marxism focused on class-based oppression. Critical theory puts some focus on class, but also puts focus on more cultural domains of society. Characteristics of people such as their race and gender came to the forefront of the oppression narratives of many of these thinkers. Marxism never took a large hold on people in the west. Socialism never took hold amongst much of the societal consciousness. But we can see this new "cultural Marxism" has had immense success in the west. It is so successful that its own beliefs have been linguistically wrapped up with the notion that the success of their ideas has been a historical reality, and will continue to be into the future. Progressivism as it is called.

While this new narrative or story, oftentimes referred to as "wokeness" in contemporary discourse, has not experienced the same reality check as religion or Marxism has (at least not yet), it is becoming increasingly evident that the story is incompatible in reality to a similar degree. The expansion of the moral circle that wokeness took from Marxism came with it assumptions about the nature of man and how man is to be liberated. It also came with a similar conservative tendency to automatically and dogmatically reject any ideas or information which may contradict their story. Internal contradictions can even be witnessed within the ideology in its attempt to ever increasingly uncritically listen to the whims of particular groups of people. An example of this is the notion of "diversity, equity, and inclusion", an extremely common mantra used to elucidate the aims of woke people within all areas of public life. And yet, it is absurd to promote the three notions at once. Under any definition of diversity which sees it as valuable, that being differences in cultures and experiences, there is a necessity to have people who live in differing circumstances. But these differing circumstances will necessarily create an inequality in outcomes for these people, an absence of equity. The notion of having both diversity and equity is oxymoronic.

So what does this mean for our contemporary world? It means that we are fundamentally inhibited from pursuing the truth when it risks contradicting the dominant narrative. We can see this in the overwhelming left-wing presence in academia, with being left-wing nowadays being borderline synonymous with being woke. Questioning this narrative means putting a risk to your reputation, your financial security, and even sometimes your physical safety. Stories are rampant of student mobs going after professors for deviating from the script; Stories are common of professors being fired for heresy, to be cast away from the primary institution which disseminates knowledge to society. The very institutions which aim to question everything, to seek a greater understanding of the world, are driven by the precise irrationality which the enlightenment tried to undo. But the Enlightenment couldn't stop it from happening. Why?

This gets back to the reason why the Enlightenment was said to simultaneously create the world's biggest triumphs and tragedies. It deconstructed our narratives about religion, but it didn't give us a narrative to pick us back up. And so people, many of whom were interested in getting into causes wanted something to give them that sense of purpose. To give them a rhyme or reason to the world, and to their existence. Those who provide that meaning for them, will get many to rally, frenzied over the new cause. But it comes at the expense of advancing our knowledge, and ensuring that those who are interested in doing so have the freedom to.

The biggest issue, the issue that we have to understand, is how we simultaneously provide those who are desperate for a sense of meaning with that sense of meaning, while also ensuring that those who advance society and wish to pursue the truth are free to do so. We want a way to progress our understanding, while also conserving our reason for going on. Perhaps this is futile, but I do not believe we have exhausted all of our options yet. It is clear that the current wokeness story is a flawed story, but that doesn't mean that we can't have a story to guide us which doesn't inhibit our development as a species.
